ELICITING SUPERORDINATE CATEGORIES 1
The Power of the Lexicon: Eliciting Superordinate Categories With and Without Labels
Lilia Rissmana , Gary Lupyan a
a Department of Psychology, University of Wisconsin – Madison, 1202 W. Johnson St.,
Madison, WI 53706
Author Note
Lilia Rissman https://orcid.org/0000-0002-3796-2719
Gary Lupyan https://orcid.org/0000-0001-8441-7433
We have no known conflicts of interest to disclose.
Correspondence should be directed to Lilia Rissman, Department of Psychology,
Rochester Institute of Technology lrrgsh@rit.edu. +1 773-206-3954.
Other author emails:
lupyan@wisc.edu
ELICITING SUPERORDINATE CATEGORIES 2
Abstract
Words are sometimes thought to label concepts, e.g., people have the concept ANIMAL which is
labeled by the word animal. An alternative view is that words help people create conceptual
categories. We address this debate by asking English speakers to list members of superordinate
categories under one of three conditions: (1) when cued by a label (e.g., animals), (2) an
exemplar list (e.g., dog, cat, mouse), or (3) a definition (e.g., “living creatures that roam the
Earth”). We find that categories activated by labels lead to participants listing more category-
typical responses, as quantified through typicality ratings, similarity in word embedding space,
and accuracy in guessing category labels. This effect is stronger for some categories than others
(e.g., stronger for appetizers than animals). These results support the view that words create
rather than merely reflect categories, and that researchers should exercise caution when drawing
parallels between conceptual categories and lexical semantics.
Keywords: concepts, categories, lexical semantics, superordinate nouns, distributional
semantics
ELICITING SUPERORDINATE CATEGORIES 3
1 Introduction
Consider the words banana, orange, and grapes. If you are a typical American adult, you would
have extensive knowledge about these objects and you would likely think of them as belonging
to the same category. If asked to name this category in English, you would likely say: fruit. How
necessary is this label for invoking the category? Different theories of the relationship between
language and thought suggest different answers to this question (Snodgrass, 1984). Some
theories emphasize words as labels for categories—categories that are either innate or present in
the environment and learned through experience (Gliozzi, Mayor, Hu, & Plunkett, 2009; Rogers
& McClelland, 2004; Sloutsky, Lo, & Fisher, 2001). Other theories emphasize words as creating
categories, and that words carve up conceptual/perceptual space in different ways across
languages (Levinson, 1997; Malt & Majid, 2013; Thompson, Roberts, & Lupyan, 2020).
Previous research has provided empirical evidence consistent with both these perspectives. We
attempt to reconcile previous findings, focusing on the domain of superordinate categories—we
examine the usefulness of words like fruit (which pick out larger categories than the “basic-
level” words banana and orange) on the activation and structure of the categories they denote.
1.1 Words as labels-for vs. creators-of categories
Researchers generally agree that people categorize the world in multiple, cross-cutting ways. For
example, the items cheeseburger, pizza, and hot dog could be categorized as food, or things to
eat at a baseball stadium, or items that are partially colored brown, etc. (see Ross & Murphy,
1999). Researchers disagree, however, concerning the role of language in organizing and
accessing this category space.1 Theories that emphasize words as labels often assume underlying
1 Although the convention of writing requires us to describe these categories using language, we do not assume that
people require language to represent any of these categories.
ELICITING SUPERORDINATE CATEGORIES 4
conceptual knowledge (also called semantic memory) where labels are one of the attributes of a
category (Kumar, 2021; Martin, 2016; Patterson, Nestor, & Rogers, 2007; Ralph, Jefferies,
Patterson, & Rogers, 2017). As described by Martin (2016), semantic information about objects
“can be accessed through multiple modalities…information about how dogs look is accessed
automatically when we hear a bark, or when we read or hear the word ‘dog’” (980). From this
perspective, knowing the label (dog) that English speakers use to refer to the concept DOG is on
par with knowing what dogs like to eat or what their fur feels like. Extended to superordinate
categories, the word list banana, orange, grapes activates the concept FRUIT. The word fruit
may be used to communicate this concept but is not itself necessary to activate the concept.
This view aligns with evidence that category formation in general is not dependent on
language. For one, people can extract categories like different species of birds from co-varying
clusters of features in the environment (see Malt, 1995; Rogers & McClelland, 2004 for review).
In addition, children can represent categories without knowing words for them (see Westermann
& Mareschal, 2014 for review). For example, 3- to 4-month-old infants can already categorize
horses vs. cats (Eimas & Quinn, 1994) and 12-month-old infants can categorize novel objects
(e.g., staplers vs. teapots), which helps scaffold word learning (Pomiechowska & Gliga, 2018).
These findings indicate that people can represent categories in conceptual/perceptual space
without help from linguistic labels (but see Balaban & Waxman, 1997; Ferguson & Waxman,
2017; Havy & Waxman, 2016; Waxman & Markow, 1995 on the facilitative roles language
plays in early childhood categorization).
Do people activate superordinate concepts independently from language, such that the
word fruit merely labels the concept FRUIT? Several studies suggest yes. For example, when
people rate the similarity of two items (e.g., watermelon, strawberry), their ratings do not differ
ELICITING SUPERORDINATE CATEGORIES 5
depending on whether they are cued with the category label (e.g., fruit) or not (Barsalou, 1982;
Ross & Murphy, 1999). In addition, when people judge whether a word is a member of a
category (e.g., soda—beverages), people are not faster after reading a sentence that primes the
category (e.g., “The soda was poured into a glass by the waiter”) (Ross & Murphy, 1999).
Finally, Waxman and Gelman (1986) asked three- and four-year-old children to categorize
objects using three types of cues: labels (e.g., “this puppet only likes animals”), an exemplar list
(e.g., “This puppet only likes things like a dog, or a horse, or a duck, and other things like that”),
or by telling them that the exemplar objects (i.e., the dog, horse, and duck) make “a really good
group.” Children then divided a larger set of objects into one basket that the puppet would like
and a second basket that the puppet would not like. Although three-year-olds made more correct
classifications given the superordinate label (animal, clothing, or food) than the other two cues,
four-year-olds were at ceiling for all three cue types. That is, exemplars and superordinate labels
appeared to activate similar categories in the minds of four-year-olds (adults were not tested).
These results suggest that items at the basic level (e.g., the word watermelon, or a picture of a
watermelon) can activate a superordinate category with the same meaning as the superordinate
word. Although individuals in these tasks may be self-generating the labels even when labels are
not explicitly given, this set of results is at least compatible with the idea that people can activate
concepts independently from their labels.
An alternate perspective is that language constitutes its own system of semantic
organization, where the categories denoted by words interface with but are not reducible to
conceptual and perceptual categories (Enfield, 2022; Keller, 1998). Instead, words create their
own categories—if English speakers read the list banana, orange, grapes, they would only
activate a category with the same intension as fruit if they are actually cued with that word
ELICITING SUPERORDINATE CATEGORIES 6
(either externally or internally). This view emphasizes that words, as discrete units, increase
people’s propensity to impose categorical boundaries on conceptual/perceptual space (Lupyan,
2012, 2016; Westermann & Mareschal, 2014). In addition, Malt (2019) questions whether
conceptual knowledge really comes in word-sized chunks: “although ‘categorization’ is often
cited as a crucial operation for navigating the world…, it is not obvious that interpreting
experiences, as opposed to communicating about them, requires the association of some element
of immediate experience with a bounded chunk of stored knowledge” (8).
This view is supported by the fact that words in different languages carve up
conceptual/perceptual space in different ways (Blasi, Henrich, Adamou, Kemmerer, & Majid,
2022; Kemmerer, 2019; Levinson & Wilkins, 2006). For example, Dutch uses separate verbs for
cutting with a single blade (e.g., cutting bread with a knife; snijden) vs. cutting with two blades
(e.g., cutting hair with scissors; knippen) whereas English uses the verb cut for both these types
of events. Importantly, these lexical differences do not necessarily correspond to differences in
how people conceptualize categories as measured through other tasks. For example, speakers of
English, Spanish, and Chinese sort pictures of household containers in similar ways despite
naming them in strikingly different ways (Malt, Sloman, Gennari, Shi, & Wang, 1999). Although
Chinese lacks a superordinate term corresponding to the English word drugs (which includes
both legal and illegal drugs), English speakers do not rate word pairs such as aspirin, cocaine as
more similar than Chinese speakers do (Rissman, Liu, & Lupyan, 2023). Thus users of different
languages have shared knowledge of conceptual/perceptual categories, even if these languages
provide different sets of labels. In a framework where the word fruit labels the concept FRUIT,
this asymmetry is difficult to account for (see Kemmerer, 2022; Malt, 2019 for discussion). In
addition, some categories which have been assumed to be perceptually universal, such as
ELICITING SUPERORDINATE CATEGORIES 7
emotion and color categories, are in fact influenced by individuals’ specific culture and language
(Gendron, Roberson, van der Vyver, & Barrett, 2014; Lupyan, Abdel Rahman, Boroditsky, &
Clark, 2020). Writing about the “wild” concept tea in British English (the plant, the drink, the
meal which often omits actual tea, the time of a meal, etc.), Keller (1998) asserts “we do not first
learn the concept ‘tea’, and then, in a second step, as it were, to denote this concept with the
word tea; rather, we learn the rule of use of the word tea in our ordinary communication (p. 68).
Words also appear to play a special role in activating category knowledge relative to
other category cues. When English-speaking adults hear an auditory cue paired with a picture
and report whether the picture matches the cue, participants are faster when the cue is a label
(e.g., “cow”) rather than a characteristic sound (e.g., a cow mooing) (Edmiston & Lupyan, 2015;
Lupyan & Thompson-Schill, 2012). These findings cast doubt on the proposal that words are just
one feature associated with a concept, on par with features such as characteristic appearance,
sounds, and textures.
The outcome of this debate has implications for several important theoretical questions in
cognitive science. First, if lexical items play a role in creating categories rather than merely
labeling them, then researchers seeking to understand how the brain encodes meaning must
consider the particular language(s) of the individuals being studied. Since different languages
package conceptual content in different ways, neuroscientific research on English speakers (the
majority of published research to date) elucidates only one type of semantic architecture (see
Blasi et al., 2022; Kemmerer, 2019; Malt, 2019 for discussion). Second, this debate speaks to
the fundamental linguistic question of whether semantic and conceptual representations are
isomorphic, or whether our understanding of lexical units is organized in a qualitatively different
way than our understanding of conceptual categories (see Jackendoff, 1990; Levinson, 1997;
ELICITING SUPERORDINATE CATEGORIES 8
Pustejovsky, 1995). Finally, if words create mental categories, then language — and the
particular language(s) one uses — will play a critical role in children’s cognitive development
(see Gentner & Goldin-Meadow, 2003).
1.2 Approach
We conducted a series of experiments to see whether it is possible to activate the same
superordinate category that is activated by the conventional superordinate label, in the absence of
an overt label. Superordinate nouns are typically learned later than their basic-level counterparts
(Nelson, 1996; Rosch, Mervis, Gray, Johnson, & Boyes-Braem, 1976), so by the time a child
learns insect they can appreciate that bees are more similar to mosquitoes than they are to dogs.
Thus superordinate nouns may be learned more as labels for categories within an already
elaborated conceptual system rather than as a cue to a category. At the same time, language may
play an important role in forming superordinate categories, as these are more abstract than basic
level categories, are less cohesive, and less grounded in clusters of perceptual features in the
environment (Nelson, 1988; Waxman & Gelman, 1986; Yu, Maxfield, & Zelinsky, 2016). The
sets of superordinate nouns differ across languages (Goddard & Wierzbicka, 2014; Kemmerer,
2019; Mihatsch, 2007). For example, ||Gana divides living things not into categories of plant and
animal but into categories such as kx’ooxo (‘living things which are edible’) and paaxo (‘living
things which are harmful to humans’) (Harrison, 2007). This variability demonstrates that
multiple categorizations are available to humans, and the superordinate nouns of English are not
inevitable reflections of perceptual groupings in the environment.
We test two non-label ways of cueing categories: exemplar lists (e.g., cheeseburger,
pizza, hot dog) and definitions (e.g., ‘items consumed for nourishment and sustenance’). We then
ELICITING SUPERORDINATE CATEGORIES 9
compare people’s understanding of these categories with their understanding of superordinate
nouns (e.g., food). We test exemplar lists because prior research suggests that basic-level
members of a category can activate superordinate categories (Barsalou, 1982; Ross & Murphy,
1999). In addition, conveying a category through representative members is widely attested
across languages (Mauri, 2017; Mauri & Sansò, 2018). We test definitions because this is a
plausible way of activating a category without using the word for it. In fact, many theorists have
assumed that even if English lacks a translational equivalent for a word in another language (e.g.,
Dutch knippen), this has little consequence for communication because English speakers can just
use the word’s definition (e.g., ‘cut with two blades’) (see Rissman et al., 2023 for review). Our
design provides a specific but strong test of the hypothesis that labels affect category
representation because our English-speaking adult participants are already familiar with all the
superordinate concepts we use. That is, we may fail to find a difference between label cues and
exemplar list cues because speakers might implicitly encode the word list orange, banana,
grapes as fruit. Finding a difference between the conditions therefore constitutes strong evidence
that labels affect categorization.
One of the limitations of prior studies on superordinate categories is that researchers
tested relatively few categories and items per category. Using crowdsourced data collection and
distributional semantic models allows for a large-scale and more nuanced investigation into
superordinate category representation than has been pursued in previous studies.
ELICITING SUPERORDINATE CATEGORIES 10
2 Experiment 1
We investigated category representation by asking English speakers to list members of various
categories. We varied how these categories were cued: through a label, an exemplar list, or a
definition. If labels play a unique role in creating categories, we predict two ways in which the
responses of people cued by labels will differ from the responses of people cued by exemplar
lists or definitions. First, responses will be more central to the category activated by the label—
for example, we predict that responses will be more typical of the category fruit when people are
given the label fruit than when they are given an exemplar list (e.g., orange, banana, grapes) or
a definition. Second, we predict that responses will be less variable, and individuals will be
better aligned with each other, given labels over exemplar lists or definitions. This prediction
follows from research showing that labels help people align in communication (Rissman et al.,
2023).
2.1 Participants
We recruited 264 English-speaking adults on Amazon Mechanical Turk (Experiment 1A: Nfemale
= 89, Nmale = 82, Nother = 3, age range = 20 – 70, median age = 36; Experiment 1B: Nfemale = 37,
Nmale = 52, Nother = 1, age range = 23 – 71, median age = 38). An additional 38 participants were
tested but were excluded for providing repetitive or non-word responses (N = 7) or because they
viewed a duplicate set of trials as another participant (N = 31; see Design and procedure).
Participants received $1.00 for completing the study. Different participants were tested across
each of Experiments 1A-B, Experiment 2, and the Typicality rating task. Informed consent was
obtained for all participants in this study. This research was approved by the University of
Wisconsin – Madison Institutional Review Board, #2020-0683.
ELICITING SUPERORDINATE CATEGORIES 11
2.2 Materials
In Experiment 1A, we used the 20 superordinate terms shown in Table 1. We selected terms that
have been studied in previous work on superordinate categories (see Wisniewski, Imai, & Casey,
1996), that are familiar to English speakers, and that have sufficiently many category members
(cf., precipitation). This set includes both natural kind and artifact category terms and mass and
count terms (cf. food vs. games).
In Experiment 1B, we tested 20 definitions corresponding to each of the 20 superordinate
terms in Table 1. We selected one definition for each term using the following procedure: first,
we asked 15 adult English speakers on Amazon Mechanical Turk to write definitions for each of
the 20 terms.2 From this set, we selected three definitions per term that we judged to be the best
approximations of the term’s meaning. We then asked 16 adult English speakers on Amazon
Mechanical Turk to rate on a 0 – 100 scale how good the definition was for the term (0 – terrible,
100 – excellent). To avoid ties, we asked participants to give different ratings to each of the three
definitions. For each term, we selected the definition with the highest mean rating; these are
listed in Table 1. Across terms, mean ratings ranged from 73 to 92 with an overall mean of 82.3
Table 1. Superordinate terms and definitions tested in Experiments 1A-B
Term
(Experiment 1A)
Definition
(Experiment 1B)
Definition mean
rating (SD)
animals Living creatures that roam the Earth 80.9 (18.2)
appetizers Foods that are eaten before the main course 82.1 (14.4)
2 Participants were instructed to not consult dictionary definitions.
3 The three definitions for vegetables all received relatively low mean ratings (less than 70). We therefore
constructed a definition for vegetables that we judged to be more appropriate.
ELICITING SUPERORDINATE CATEGORIES 12
chores Jobs done at home to keep the home running smoothly 79.9 (16)
clothing Garments that we wear on our body 78.2 (16.7)
desserts Sweet foods that are usually eaten after a meal 81.8 (14.7)
diseases Ailments that can hurt or infect people or animals 78.1 (16.6)
flowers
Things which are part of a plant and have colorful petals and
stems 80.2 (18.7)
food Items consumed for nourishment and sustenance 87.5 (10.7)
fruit Foods that are grown from a seed and have seeds in them 74.1 (21.8)
furniture
Things used in the home or workplace to sit, eat, sleep or
hold items 86.1 (15.2)
games Activities that people participate in for fun 78.1 (19)
hobbies
Activities or interests people do or participate in for
fun/leisure 86.7 (13.5)
mammals
Warm-blooded animals that give birth to live young and
produce milk 92.1 (10)
pets
Domesticated animals kept as helpers or companions by
humans 88.6 (13)
plants Organisms that grow in soil and use photosynthesis 86.6 (12.9)
tools Objects that are used to fix or create things 77.3 (18.7)
toys Things that are made for children to play with 73 (17.3)
vegetables Foods that are parts of plants but are not fruits, nuts, or seeds NA
vehicles Types of machinery used to transport humans or cargo 88.1 (10.6)
weapons Things that are used to harm others or for self defense 75.8 (22.6)
ELICITING SUPERORDINATE CATEGORIES 13
We used Turker-generated definitions with the goal of understanding how non-technical
definitions that might be produced in everyday communication activate category representation.
It is possible, however, that these rough-and-ready definitions are inferior to those produced by
trained lexicographers. To assess this possibility, we gathered ratings of definitions from three
online dictionaries: Oxford Languages, Merriam-Webster, and American Heritage. For each term
in Table 1, we selected the first definition that appeared under the noun entry for that term,
unless that definition corresponded to a different sense than our Turker-generated definition
(e.g., the first definition of pet appearing in the Merriam-Webster dictionary is "a pampered and
usually spoiled child"). Definitions were pluralized and technical jargon was removed (e.g.
"kingdom (Animalia)" was removed from the definition of animal). We also removed exemplar
lists from definitions. For example, the Merriam-Webster definition of vegetable is "a usually
herbaceous plant (such as the cabbage, bean, or potato) grown for an edible part that is usually
eaten as part of a meal"—we removed the exemplar list "(such as the cabbage, bean, or potato)."
Dictionary definitions are listed in Supplementary Materials.
Fourteen English speakers on Amazon Mechanical Turk viewed four definitions of each
term on a single screen (the three dictionary definitions and our Turker-generated definition) and
were asked to rate each definition from 0 to 100. Participants were told to rate each definition
according to how well they think it captures the meaning of the word. As in the previous rating
study, participants were told that they should not assign the same value to more than one
definition. The order of the definitions on the screen was randomized. Participants rated
definitions for all 20 superordinate terms, which were presented in random order. An additional
27 English speakers were tested but excluded for failing one or more attention check trials. In
these trials, participants viewed three dictionary definitions along with an incorrect definition of
ELICITING SUPERORDINATE CATEGORIES 14
an additional superordinate (e.g., for drugs, the incorrect definition was "organic compounds that
contain only carbon, hydrogen, and oxygen and that originate chiefly as products of
photosynthesis"). To pass an attention check trial, participants needed to rate the incorrect
definition lower than all three dictionary definitions.
2.3 Design and procedure
In Experiment 1A, participants viewed one of two Cue Types: Labels or Exemplars (see Figure
1). Participants in the Label condition viewed the terms in Table 1 and were asked to list six
members of each category. We gave participants the examples of colors and beverages (i.e.,
given the category colors, they might list red, blue, green, yellow, orange, pink). Each
participant listed category members for 10 superordinate labels, selected randomly from the total
set of 20 and presented in a random order. In the Exemplar condition each participant was yoked
to a participant from the Label condition, viewing the first three category members listed by the
yoked Label condition participant. Participants in the Exemplar condition were told that these
three words belonged to a category and that their task was to list three more members of the
category. As in the Label condition, we gave Exemplar participants the examples of colors and
beverages (i.e., “if you were given the words red, blue, and green, you might list yellow, orange,
and pink.”) Each Exemplar participant was yoked to a unique Label participant. Participants in
both conditions were instructed to list the first category members that came to mind.
Experiment 1B added a Definition condition. The procedure for Experiment 1B was the
same as for the Label condition in Experiment 1A, except that participants were given a phrase
naming a category and were asked to list six members of that category. Participants were given
the examples actions which are illegal and things you can drink (e.g., “if you were given the
ELICITING SUPERORDINATE CATEGORIES 15
phrase ‘Things you can drink,’ you might list the following category members: soda, wine, beer,
water, iced tea, coffee”).
2.4 Data preprocessing
We standardized spelling and inflectional variants of responses to reduce inconsequential
variability. For example, action-figure and action figure were replaced by action figures;
cleaning the room was replaced with cleaning room. We retained the variant that was most
common across all responses.
2.5 Typicality ratings
Figure 1. Schematic representation of Experiment 1A design with sample participant
responses.
ELICITING SUPERORDINATE CATEGORIES 16
We collected typicality ratings for all term/response pairs produced in Experiments 1A-B (e.g.,
fruit/banana; N = 2886). Responses across all three Cue Types were evaluated relative to the
superordinate term associated with each trial. For example, the participant in the Exemplar
condition in Figure 1 produced the response baked Alaska, and the typicality of baked Alaska
was evaluated relative to the term desserts. Similarly, for participants in the Definition condition
who viewed the category definition “Sweet foods that are usually eaten after a meal,” their
responses were evaluated relative to the term desserts.
To collect typicality ratings, we recruited an additional 490 English speakers on Amazon
Mechanical Turk (Nfemale = 201, Nmale = 283, Nother/NA = 6, age range = 20 – 78, median age = 37).
Participants were asked “How typical is the example [response] of the category [label]?” and
rated each term/response pair on a scale from 1 to 8, where 1 corresponded Not an example, 2 to
Not typical at all, and 8 to Very Typical. Participants were given the example: “if the category is
‘sports’, you would probably rate football as more typical than lacrosse.” Participants viewed
one or two terms chosen at random from the total list of 20, and responses were rated in term
blocks (e.g., a plants block followed by an appetizers block). The median number of ratings per
term/response pair was 12 (Nmin = 7). Participants received between $1.25 and $1.75 depending
on the number of trials they completed (ranging from 50 to 120 trials).
2.6 Response similarity in word embedding space
Quantifying similarity between people’s responses would require an enormous number of
pairwise comparisons. We therefore relied on word embeddings learned by a distributional
semantic model. These models are trained to predict words based on their surrounding context
and are an increasingly common tool used in cognitive science to model semantic relationships
ELICITING SUPERORDINATE CATEGORIES 17
(Boleda, 2020; Bolognesi, 2020; Thompson et al., 2020). The output of these models is a set of
vectors that positions each word at a unique point in a high-dimensional space. We used word
embeddings trained on English Wikipedia+Statmt news corpus using the fast-text algorithm (300
dimensions with subwords) (Bojanowski, Grave, Joulin, & Mikolov, 2017). Using these
embeddings, we computed the cosine distance between responses. In the analyses that follow,
“similarity” refers to 1 minus the cosine distance. One shortcoming of this method is that we
lacked embeddings for the 13% of our responses that were multi-word phrases (e.g., heart
disease). For these, we treated the response as the vector sum of the component words. This
procedure produces reasonably good representations of compound words such as those we are
dealing with here (Boleda, 2020).4 For compound word calculations, we excluded the word and
(e.g., for chips and dip, we summed the vector for chips and the vector for dip).
As additional verification, we replicated all our analyses using the subs2vec embeddings
derived from movie and TV show subtitles (van Paridon & Thompson, 2020) which contains
entries for many compound words. Analyses using the subtitles embeddings are included in
Supplementary Materials. For almost all analyses, the Wikipedia and subtitles embeddings
yielded equivalent findings; divergent results are noted in the text.
2.7 Frequency and generality by superordinate term
We anticipated that some terms would show larger condition differences than other terms.
Although there are many possible reasons for such condition-by-term interactions, we can gain
initial insights by considering term frequency and generality. These two covariates are proxy
measures for important properties of individual categories such as how common/culturally
4 An alternative solution is to use embeddings from contextual models such as BERT and its variants. However, this
necessitates additional assumptions about what context to use when generating the embedding of the target word(s).
ELICITING SUPERORDINATE CATEGORIES 18
relevant the category is, the frequency of the term in ambient language, and the specificity of the
category (although specificity is related to concreteness, the two are theoretically distinct
(Bolognesi, 2020)). We quantified frequency as log-transformed word counts from the Corpus of
Contemporary American English (both written and spoken language included) (Davies, 2023).
We collected ratings of the generality of each term from 34 English speakers on Amazon
Mechanical Turk (see Bolognesi, 2020; Lewis, Colunga, & Lupyan, 2021). Participants rated
how general or specific a word’s meaning is on a 1-5 scale (1 being very specific and 5 being
very general). Participants were instructed that “animal is quite general, dog is more specific,
and poodle is even more specific.” Participants rated the generality of 295 superordinate
terms/phrases, and we obtained 10-12 ratings for each term.
2.8 Results
2.8.1 Analytic approach
We compared participants’ responses across the three Cue Type conditions (Label, Exemplar,
and Definition) in three ways. First, we quantified the centrality of each generated response
relative to the category denoted by each superordinate label (Section 2.8.2). For example, if a
participant in the Label condition listed brownie, ice cream, chocolate cake, and a participant in
the Exemplar condition listed ice cream, cookies, baked Alaska, how central is each of these
responses to the category desserts? Second, we analyzed the diversity of the responses produced
in each condition: did participants produce a wider range of responses in one condition over the
others (Section 2.8.3).
In addition to testing whether Cue Type influenced participants’ responses, we analyzed
how responses differed depending on when in the trial they were produced (first response,
ELICITING SUPERORDINATE CATEGORIES 19
second response, etc.). Participants in the Label and Definition conditions produced six
responses, corresponding to Response Numbers 1 through 6. Participants in the Exemplar
condition only produced three responses, but we label these as having Response Numbers 4, 5,
and 6, to maintain comparability across the three Cue Type conditions (see Figure 1).
We fit mixed effects linear regression models using the lme4 package for R (Bates,
Maechler, Bolker, & Walker, 2014; R Core Team, 2022). We evaluated whether a predictor
makes a significant contribution to a model using likelihood ratio testing. The independent
variable Response Number was analyzed as a continuous variable. Unless noted otherwise,
models included random intercepts for Participants and Terms as well as Term by Cue Type
random slopes.5 Continuous variables were centered and scaled. We used the lmerTest package
(Kuznetsova, Brockhoff, & Christensen, 2017) and Satterthwaite approximation to compute p-
values for fixed effects (see Luke, 2017). 95% confidence intervals were calculated using
summarySEwithin from the Rmisc package. Stimuli materials, data files, analysis scripts, and
Supplementary Materials are available at:
https://osf.io/y7g2r/?view_only=7361fd78979d469fa0da2f7511fd10f5.
2.8.2 Semantic centrality of responses
We analyzed the relationship between the responses and category structures denoted by the
superordinate terms in two ways: first, we analyzed the typicality ratings described in Section 2.5
(e.g., “how typical is the example ‘cheesecake’ of the category ‘desserts’?”). Second, we used
the word embeddings described in Section 2.6 as a measure of each response’s similarity to the
centroid of each superordinate term in word embedding space (defined in the Appendix).
5 Adding Participant by Response Number random slopes prevented the models from converging.
ELICITING SUPERORDINATE CATEGORIES 20
Measures of similarity-to-centroid were found to have a moderate positive correlation with
human ratings of typicality: r(2736) = .57, p < .001. The results using typicality and similarity-
to-centroid were highly similar; the latter are reported in the Appendix.
In the analyses below, we compared Response Numbers 1 through 6 between the Label
and Definition conditions but only Response Numbers 4 through 6 between the Label and
Exemplar conditions.
The mean typicality of each response relative to the superordinate term is shown in
Figure 2. We fit one model to the Label/Exemplar data and another model to the
Label/Definition data, as Response Numbers 1-3 were absent from the Exemplar condition. We
used sum contrast coding for the Cue Type variable: coefficient values reflect the difference
between the Label condition and the overall mean.
In the Label vs. Exemplar model, responses were more typical in the Label condition (β
= .080, CI95 = [.021, .14], t = -2.66, p < .05). Responses decreased in their typicality as Response
Number increased (β = -0.064, CI95 = [-0.088, -.040], t = -5.25, p < .001), and there was an
interaction between Cue Type and Response Number such that the difference between the Label
and Exemplar conditions was greater for higher Response Numbers (β = .032, CI95 =
[.008, .056], t = 2.62, p < .01). This result shows that when participants just saw exemplar lists
such as cheesecake, apple pie, bananas foster, they produced responses that were judged as
being less typical members of the superordinate. We will refer to this effect as the Label
Advantage.
ELICITING SUPERORDINATE CATEGORIES 21
In the Label vs. Definition model, responses were again more typical in the Label
condition (β = .22, CI95 = [.12, .32], t = 4.38, p < .001) and responses decreased in their typicality
as Response Number increased (β = -0.19, CI95 = [-0.20, -0.17], t = -22.22, p < .001). Adding the
interaction between Cue Type and Response Number did not significantly increase the likelihood
of the model. This result demonstrates a Label Advantage for definitions: participants produced
more typical category members when cued with the label rather than with a definition of the
term.
As described in Section 2.5, participants in the typicality rating task could select that a
response was not just atypical but was not even a member of the category, e.g., all participants
judged that a cedar is not an example of the category flowers. We asked to what extent the Label
Advantage for typicality ratings was driven by Not-example responses, as opposed to atypical
Figure 2. Mean typicality ratings for each response/term pair, grouped by Cue Type and
Response Number (Experiment 1A: Label and Exemplar conditions; Experiment 1B:
Definition condition). Typicality was judged on a scale from 1 (Not an example) to 8
(Very Typical). Error bars show 95% confidence intervals of the mean.
ELICITING SUPERORDINATE CATEGORIES 22
but within category responses (e.g., trout as a type of appetizer). We modeled the typicality data
including the rate of Not-example responses for each response/term pair as a regressor in the
model (e.g., 1.0 for cedar/flowers, .5 for shovel/weapons and 0 for trout/appetizers). When Not-
example ratings were controlled for, responses in the Label condition were not significantly more
typical (p > .1). This shows that responses were more typical in the Label condition than the
Exemplar condition because Exemplar participants were more likely to produce responses that
were arguably not instances of the superordinate category. By contrast, responses in the in the
Label condition were still significantly more typical than responses in the Definition condition
controlling for likelihood of not-an-example ratings (β = .058, CI95 = [.029, .086], t = 3.97, p
< .01).
We next analyzed the size of the Label Advantage for each individual term in each
condition. As shown in Figure 3A, the Label Advantage was positive for most terms. The
advantage of labels over exemplars was small for some terms (e.g. fruit, animals, chores, and
tools) but large for others (e.g., toys, mammals, hobbies, and appetizers). We modeled whether
the frequency and generality of the superordinate terms predicted whether responses in the Label
condition were more typical than responses in the Exemplar condition. We observed a significant
interaction between Cue Type and frequency, such that the Label Advantage was greater for less
frequent terms (β = -.057, CI95 = [-.098, -.016], t = 2.70, p < .05). In a separate model, we
observed a significant interaction between Cue Type and generality, such that the Label
Advantage was greater for more specific terms (β = -.055, CI95 = [-.096, -0.14], t = 2.61, p
< .05). Rather than manifesting equally across all superordinate categories, these results show
that the advantage of labels over exemplars depended on properties of the individual categories.
ELICITING SUPERORDINATE CATEGORIES 23
We did not fit a model with both frequency and generality as predictors, as these measures are
moderately correlated (r(18) = .68, p < .001).
Turning to definitions, the size of the Label Advantage for individual terms reflects how
well our definitions approximate the meaning of the superordinate term. For example, the Label
Advantage for pets was close to zero, suggesting that “domesticated animals kept as helpers or
companions by humans” activates a similar category representation as pets. By contrast, the
Label Advantage for fruit was relatively large, meaning that “foods that are grown from a seed
and have seeds in them” does a relatively poor job of activating the category fruit. In models of
the Label/Definition data, we found that frequency of the superordinate terms interacted with
Cue Type such that more frequent superordinate terms showed a greater Label Advantage (β
= .11, CI95 = [.034, .20], t = 2.79, p < .05). The generality of the term did not interact with Cue
Type (p > .1).
As described in Section 2.2, we tested rough-and-ready definitions of the terms, rather
than dictionary definitions produced by trained experts. It may therefore be the case that we
observe a Label Advantage over definitions simply because we chose imprecise definitions for
the terms. To test this possibility, we compared the ratings of our Turker-generated definitions to
ratings of dictionary definitions. For each term, we identified which dictionary definition
received the highest rating and then computed the difference between this best definition and our
Turker definition. On a scale from 0-100, the mean difference across terms was 7.9, and
difference scores ranged from -16.2 (furniture; our definition was better) to 26.8 (diseases; our
definition was worse). In a model of response typicality with both the difference scores and Cue
Type as predictors, the interaction between difference scores and Cue Type was non-significant
(p > .1). This suggests that although the Label Advantage over definitions was greater for some
ELICITING SUPERORDINATE CATEGORIES 24
terms than others, this is likely not an artifact of the definitions that we chose. In other words, we
observed a Label Advantage not because we tested a worse definition than some existing
superior alternative, but because for many terms, adequate definitions are genuinely difficult to
construct.
Figure 3A. Mean typicality of responses, grouped by Cue Type and superordinate term
(Experiment 1A: Label and Exemplar conditions; Experiment 1B: Definition condition). Terms are
grouped by lower vs. higher frequency. Darker colors indicate a stronger Label Advantage for that
term.
ELICITING SUPERORDINATE CATEGORIES 25
Figure 3B. Similarity between participants in word embedding space, grouped by Cue Type and
superordinate term (Experiment 1A: Label and Exemplar conditions; Experiment 1B: Definition
condition). Terms are grouped by lower vs. higher frequency. Darker colors indicate a stronger
Label Advantage for that term.
ELICITING SUPERORDINATE CATEGORIES 26
2.8.3 How diverse were the responses across different Cue Types?
Participants cued by conventional superordinate labels produced more typical/central responses.
We next analyzed whether responses differed in their heterogeneity as a function of Cue Type.
For example, when participants are listing desserts, do their responses constitute a narrower
category than when participants are prompted by the exemplars cheesecake, apple pie, bananas
foster? Although responses in the Exemplar and Definition conditions were less central overall
than responses in the Label condition, these responses are not necessarily more heterogeneous.
We analyzed response diversity in two ways: by computing Simpson’s diversity index D for the
responses for each term and Cue Type, and by calculating how similar participants’ responses
were to each other in word embedding space. For these analyses, we only included Responses 4
through 6 from the Label and Definition conditions, to allow comparison of response diversity
across the three Cue Types.
2.8.3.1 Simpson’s diversity D
Simpson’s D takes into account the distribution of response types within a category as well as the
overall size of the category (see Majid et al., 2018; Rissman, van Putten, & Majid, 2022;
Zettersten & Lupyan, 2020 on computation of this index). D-values range from 0 to 1, with 0
corresponding to complete heterogeneity (all responses are different) and 1 to complete
homogeneity (all responses are the same). We computed the D-value for each term for each Cue
Type. The mean D-value across the 20 terms was .03 for each of the three Cue Types. D-values
were not significantly different between the Label and Exemplar conditions or between the Label
and Definition conditions (p’s > .1). This suggests that although responses were less central to
ELICITING SUPERORDINATE CATEGORIES 27
the category in the Exemplar and Definition conditions, the responses were not themselves more
heterogeneous in these conditions.
2.8.3.2 How similar were participants to each other?
As a second test of whether responses were more diverse for some Cue Types than others, we
analyzed how much individual participants aligned with each other across the three Cue Types.
We observed in Section 2.8.2 that responses were less central to the category in the Exemplar
and Definition conditions. It does not necessarily follow, however, that individuals diverged
from each other more in these conditions—it could be that participants all produced the same
kinds of atypical responses (e.g., trout as a type of appetizer). To test this, we calculated the
similarity between the responses for each pair of participants in word embedding space. For
example, if one Label participant produced potato, leek, onion and another Label participant
produced kale, okra, lettuce as their fourth, fifth, and sixth responses in a vegetables trial, we
computed the similarity between each pair of responses across the two participants (e.g., between
potato and kale but not between potato and leek). We then calculated the mean similarity
between each pair of participants for each Cue Type (Figure 4). For this analysis and the
analyses in the subsequent section, we used treatment coding for the Cue Type variable, with the
Label condition as the reference level.
Pairwise similarity was lower in the Exemplar condition than in the Label condition (β =
-.22, CI95 = [-.34, -.094], t = -3.45, p < .01), but did not differ between the Label and Definition
conditions (β = -.21, CI95 = [-.45, .041], t = -1.64, p = .12). This analysis suggests that when
participants viewed an exemplar list, they interpreted the category structure of the list in
divergent ways, leading them to align less with one another than when viewing a superordinate
ELICITING SUPERORDINATE CATEGORIES 28
term. By contrast, viewing a definition did not lead to lower alignment. This non-result should be
interpreted with caution, however, as when we calculated pairwise similarity using the subtitles
embeddings (see Section 2.6), there was significantly less alignment in the Definition condition
than the Label condition (β = -.26, CI95 = [-.45, .066], t = -2.64, p < .05).
Figure 3B shows the Label Advantage for individual terms. The advantage of labels over
exemplars was positive for most terms, with the largest Label Advantage for toys and vehicles
and smallest for chores and vegetables (for which the Label Advantage was negative). In models
of the Label/Exemplar data, neither the frequency and nor the generality of the terms interacted
with Cue Type (p’s > .1). There was a negative Label Advantage for many of the terms in the
Figure 4. Mean similarity in word embedding space between each pair of participants for each
Cue Type. Each point is a participant (indicating the mean similarity between that participant
and every other participant).
ELICITING SUPERORDINATE CATEGORIES 29
Definition condition (e.g., vehicles, games, clothing), indicating that the definitions for those
terms led to less diversity and more cross-subject alignment than the terms themselves did.
2.8.4 Similarity of responses within trials
In an exploratory analysis, we used the word embeddings to calculate the mean semantic
similarity between responses 4-6 and responses 1-3 in each trial. For example, if a Label
participant produced broccoli, zucchini, carrot as their first three responses and potato, leek,
onion as their second three responses, we calculated the mean similarity over all pairs in the
Cartesian product of these two sets (i.e., broccoli/potato, broccoli/leek, etc.). Similarity on this
measure was significantly higher in the Exemplar condition than in the Label condition (β
= .087, CI95 = [.012, .16], t = 2.28, p < .05) but did not differ between the Label and Definition
conditions (p > .1). This suggests that participants in the Exemplar condition were more strongly
tethered to the particular responses 1-3 than participants in the Label condition were.
2.9 Discussion
When people are asked to list members of a category, it matters whether the category is cued
with a superordinate label vs. an exemplar list vs. a definition. Given a superordinate label rather
than an exemplar list, participants’ responses were more central to the category activated by the
label, as measured through typicality ratings as well as similarity of computed word
embeddings—a Label Advantage. Participants’ responses were also more central when cued with
a label when compared with being cued by a definition. Although participants were more aligned
with one another given label cues than exemplar cues, we did not find evidence that participants
were more aligned with each other in their interpretation of a label over a definition.
ELICITING SUPERORDINATE CATEGORIES 30
Importantly, the Label Advantage was stronger for some terms than for others, as shown in
Figure 3. This variation across terms was not random: we found a greater Label Advantage for
less frequent terms and more specific terms.
In Experiment 2, we investigated the robustness of the Label Advantage by testing
whether the items generated in response to various cues (label, exemplars, definition) helped
people infer the superordinate categories. For example, given the list ice cream, cookies, baked
Alaska (produced originally in the Exemplar condition), how successfully can participants
reconstruct that this category is desserts, and does participants’ success vary as a function of Cue
Type? This experiment is essentially Experiment 1 in reverse: rather than being given labels and
producing category members, participants are given category members and asked to produce a
label.
3 Experiment 2
3.1 Participants
We recruited 245 participants (Nfemale = 114, Nmale = 130, Nother = 1; age M = 38; range = 21 –
69). Participants were recruited through Amazon Mechanical Turk, located in the United States,
and self-reported being native speakers of English. An additional eight participants were tested
but excluded for not identifying as a native English speaker (N = 4), for listing one of the
individual exemplars rather than providing a category label as their response (N = 3), or for
providing a thematically associated word rather than a category label (e.g., guessing farmer for
the exemplar list edamame, quinoa, buckwheat; N = 1). Participants received $1.00. Informed
consent was obtained for all participants.
ELICITING SUPERORDINATE CATEGORIES 31
3.2 Design and materials
Participants guessed category labels for three-item lists produced in the Label, Exemplar, and
Definition conditions in Experiment 1 (responses 4-6 in a given trial). Given the large number of
responses produced in Experiment 1, we selected a sample of lists for this label guessing task.
For each list in Experiment 1, we calculated the mean similarity of each of the three exemplars to
the target superordinate term in word embedding space. We classified the lists for each term into
tertiles of low, medium, and high similarity and randomly sampled five lists from each tertile for
each term in each Cue Type condition (900 lists sampled in total). This sample was randomly
divided such that each participant viewed lists from a single Cue Type and provided guesses for
one list for each of the 20 terms.
3.3 Procedure & data preprocessing
Participants were instructed that they would be given three words or phrases that were members
of a category and they had to guess the name of the category. For example, if given “soda, wine,
beer,” they might guess “beverages.” They were asked to provide a single word as a category
label (e.g., not “primary colors”). Each participant completed 20 trials in random order.
We corrected the responses for spelling errors. Morphological variants of the
superordinate terms (e.g., fruits, appetizer) were counted as correct. Modified variants of the
superordinate terms (e.g., farm animals) were counted as incorrect.
3.4 Results
We analyzed the accuracy of participants’ guesses using mixed effects logistic regression and
used treatment coding for the Cue Type variable, with the Label condition as the reference level.
ELICITING SUPERORDINATE CATEGORIES 32
Participants were less accurate at guessing the original superordinate term in the Exemplar and
Definition conditions than in the Label condition (Mlabel = 67.2% vs. Mexemplar = 59.6% vs.
Mdefinition = 46.5%; Exemplar: b = -0.43, CI95 = [-0.70, -0.15], z = -3.058, p < .01; Definition: b =
-1.12, CI95 = [-1.57, -0.66], z = -4.77, p < .001). Figure 5 shows guessing accuracy as a function
of Cue Type for each superordinate term. Adding frequency to this model, we found that
accuracy was higher for more frequent terms (b = .73, CI95 = [.27, 1.18], z = 3.14, p < .01), and
that frequency interacted with Cue Type: the advantage of labels over both exemplars and
definitions was greater for more frequent terms (Exemplar: b = -0.23, CI95 = [-0.45, -0.02], z = -
2.14, p < .05; Definition: b = -.59, CI95 = [-.94, -0.24], z = -3.28, p < .01). There was no effect of
generality on the advantage of labels over exemplars, but the advantage of labels over definitions
was marginally greater for more general terms (b = -.39, CI95 = [-.79, 0.005], z = -1.94, p = .053).
Connecting the results of Experiments 1 and 2, we asked whether the average typicality
and centroid similarity of the words in the lists predicted guessing accuracy. We found that lists
composed of more typical words were easier to guess (b = 1.22, CI95 = [1.11, 1.33], z = 21.71, p
< .001). Adding typicality to the model eliminated the advantage of labels over exemplars. That
is, guessing accuracy was worse in the Exemplar condition because these lists were less typical
on average. Adding typicality to the model did not eliminate the Label Advantage over the
Definition condition. We found the same pattern of results even when excluding lists where one
or more words were judged to be not in the category of the superordinate. We also found that
lists with higher centroid similarity were easier to guess (b = .47, CI95 = [.38, .55], z = 10.74, p
< .001). Adding centroid similarity to the model did not eliminate either the advantage of labels
over exemplars or labels over definitions.
ELICITING SUPERORDINATE CATEGORIES 33
3.5 Discussion
Participants who viewed lists produced in the Experiment 1 Label condition were more accurate
at guessing the original term than participants who viewed lists produced in the Exemplar or
Definition conditions. This finding supports the results of Experiment 1: participants who are not
cued with labels produce category responses reflecting different regions of conceptual space than
Figure 5. Guessing accuracy across each Cue Type condition for each superordinate term. The
term panels are ordered by overall accuracy per term.
ELICITING SUPERORDINATE CATEGORIES 34
the labels themselves. We found considerable variation across terms regarding both participants’
overall accuracy in guessing the term as well as the size of the Label Advantage.
4 General Discussion
A common rhetorical practice across the cognitive sciences is to refer to concepts using (English)
words – for example, referencing “the concept FRUIT.” This practice reflects the perspective
that words are labels for categories—if a concept exists independently of the word that labels it,
and the word is a feature of the concept, then it is sensible to refer to the concept through the
word. And, if the concept exists independently of the word, it should be possible to activate the
concept without using the word. In this paper, we attempted to activate concepts using two types
of non-label cues: exemplar lists and definitions. Averaging across all 20 superordinate terms,
we found that exemplar lists and definitions activated different categories than the labels that
were originally used to generate them. Specifically, when participants in Experiment 1 were
given exemplars or definitions, their responses were less central to the category of the
superordinate term than when participants were given the terms themselves. Participants also
diverged more from each other when given exemplar lists. Finally, participants in Experiment 2
were less accurate at guessing the superordinate term when their clue was a list of words
produced by people in the exemplar or definition conditions. These results support the
perspective that words help create categories—that language users conceive of different
elements as being part of the same category because there is a word for that category (see the
discussion of tea in Section 1.1). That is, words impose their own boundaries on
conceptual/perceptual space rather than simply reflecting categorical groupings that already
exist.
ELICITING SUPERORDINATE CATEGORIES 35
Although we found a Label Advantage when we averaged across superordinate terms, we
also observed variation across individual terms: the Label Advantage was stronger for some
terms than for others—variation that was partially predictable from word frequency and
generality. This finding suggests valuable avenues for future research: if the Label Advantage
varies across terms, then it may be some words do in fact function as simply labels for pre-
existing concepts. In the sections that follow, we discuss why exemplars and definitions do not
in general activate the same categories as superordinate terms, we consider the status of
categories for which there was a negligible Label Advantage, and we suggest future directions
for studies on the relationship between language and cognition.
4.1 Labels vs. Exemplars
Exemplar lists (e.g., truck, doll, blocks) did not consistently activate the same category as the
label that was used to generate the exemplars (e.g., toys). This conflicts with research
summarized in Section 1.1—for example, that pairwise similarity ratings (e.g., watermelon,
strawberry) are not affected by the presence of a superordinate label (e.g., fruit) (Barsalou, 1982;
Ross & Murphy, 1999). A straightforward interpretation of the earlier findings is that similarity
ratings are not influenced by labels because the exemplars themselves activate the concept that
the label refers to. We found, however, that typical exemplars were often insufficient to activate
label categories, despite the high familiarity our participants had with the superordinates that we
tested.
An immediate observation is that exemplar lists are often more ambiguous than
conventional labels (e.g., dog, cat, human could be a group of mammals or a group of animals).
As noted in Section 1, people can categorize a set of items in multiple, cross-cutting ways. For
ELICITING SUPERORDINATE CATEGORIES 36
example, although dog, cat, human were produced by someone given the label mammals, the
individual who received these exemplars produced fish, horse, bird as their responses 4-6.
Generalizing beyond this example, we found a relatively large Label Advantage for mammals.
This result is not necessarily incompatible with the words-as-labels perspective, if we assume
that speakers in Experiment 1 know the concept MAMMALS and the concept ANIMALS, and
the exemplars dog, cat, human activate both.
However, we do not think that this type of ambiguity is the only mechanism explaining
the advantage of labels over exemplars. For one, not all terms have such clear lexical competitors
as mammals does in animals. Toys, for example, showed a relatively large Label Advantage, but
it is not obvious which term would be activated by the list truck, doll, blocks if not toys.6 Second,
the responses 4-6 of individuals in the Exemplar condition were more similar to responses 1-3
than were the responses 4-6 of individuals in the Label condition (see Section 2.8.4). This
suggests that individuals in the Exemplar condition were not simply inducing more general
categories than individuals in the Label condition were. Consider, for example, a person in the
Label condition who was given the cue appetizers and produced breadsticks, mozzarella sticks,
soup, and a person in the Exemplar condition who produced spaghetti, salad, sandwich as a
continuation of this category. The second set of responses is thematically related to the first
(casual Italian-American restaurant fare), although not all of the second person’s responses are
appetizers. This individual does not appear to be simply activating a more general, lexicalized
category such as food. Rather, for at least some Exemplar trials, participants appear to be
spontaneously generating ad hoc categories that may or may not be encoded linguistically.
6 The individual in the Exemplar condition who received truck, doll, blocks as their cue produced the list books,
action figures, animals as their responses 4-6. With respect to toys, these responses had typicality ratings of 2.2, 7.6,
and 2.8, respectively.
ELICITING SUPERORDINATE CATEGORIES 37
Given the ambiguity of exemplar lists, the earlier findings of Barsalou (1982) and Ross
and Murphy (1999) that pairs of basic level items appeared to activate the same categories as
superordinate terms may strike readers as surprising. The variation that we observed across
superordinate terms may help to explain these earlier results. Across Experiments 1 and 2, we
found little evidence for a Label Advantage for fruit, vegetables, clothing, tools, or animals. This
suggests, for example, that if people read the list banana, orange, grapes, they may in fact
activate a category with the same extension as fruit. This is all the more notable because the
words food and produce are available as alternate lexicalizations of this category, but participants
do not appear to activate those alternatives. The most atypical fruits produced by people in the
Exemplar condition were honeydew, kumquat, and coconut—people never produced responses
such as avocado or carrot, let alone bread or eggs.
Importantly, the variation that we observed across individual terms was not random
noise. In the analysis of typicality ratings in Experiment 1, we found that the Label Advantage
was greater for less frequent terms and for more specific terms. The interaction with frequency
suggests that when a label is more common in the speech environment, participants may be more
likely to activate it when viewing a list of exemplars, reducing the Label Advantage.
Alternatively, frequency in language may be a proxy for the prominence of the category in the
physical and cultural environment (e.g., we more often encounter images of different fruits
grouped together than images of different appetizers grouped together). Participants may be
more likely to activate culturally prominent categories when viewing exemplars, reducing the
Label Advantage. These explanations are not mutually exclusive. The interaction with generality
may reflect degree of ambiguity of the exemplar lists—that for more specific categories, there
are more alternative terms that could be used to construct the category (e.g., mammals 
ELICITING SUPERORDINATE CATEGORIES 38
animals; appetizers  food). In the label guessing experiment (Experiment 2), we found that the
Label Advantage was greater for more frequent terms, the reverse effect from Experiment 1. This
may be the result of a floor effect, as guessing accuracy was lower for less frequent terms. For
appetizers, mammals, and pets (all lower frequency terms), accuracy was less than 20% across
all three Cue Types. The fact that accuracy was low even in the Label condition may have made
it difficult to observe a Label Advantage. Understanding what factors predict the Label
Advantage is an important avenue for future research, as we discuss in more detail in Section
4.3.
4.2 Labels vs. Definitions
In addition to exemplar lists, we investigated whether definitions can be used to activate the
same categories as the corresponding superordinate terms. Definitions are arguably not
ambiguous in the same way as exemplar lists. Multiple theorists have also argued that if a
language happens to not express a category through a single word, other linguistic resources will
allow language users to communicate the category. Definitions are assumed to play a key role in
fueling this expressive power—if someone doesn’t know what appetizers are, they can be told
that these are “foods that are eaten before the main course.” At the same time, for students of
linguistics and cognitive science, one of the earliest lessons is the difficulty of defining words
(see Elbourne, 2011). Despite the theoretical importance of this issue, few empirical studies have
directly compared the categories activated by superordinate nouns vs. definitions. We did so in
our study and found in general that term definitions activated different categories than the terms
themselves.
ELICITING SUPERORDINATE CATEGORIES 39
As in the Exemplar condition, we found considerable variation across terms. For toys,
clothing, pets, and mammals, the Label Advantage was minimal—the definitions we chose may
have activated similar categories as the terms. However, definitions of many terms, especially
fruit, games, furniture, and vegetables, were much less effective than the simple conventional
labels. Our definitions were similar in quality to dictionary definitions and including definition
quality (relative difference between Turker-produced vs. dictionary definitions) as a covariate
did not decrease the Label Advantage. This result suggests that many meanings are difficult to
capture in a succinct definition—even dictionary definitions may fail to adequately express a
word’s meaning. More frequent terms showed a greater Label Advantage, suggesting that more
frequent terms are more difficult to define. The size of the Label Advantage did not vary with the
generality/specificity of the term.
Demonstrating a semantic difference between labels and seemingly reasonable
definitions has cultural as well as theoretical relevance. For example, in discussions of how to
adapt gendered language to be inclusive of transgender and gender-nonconforming individuals,
some have suggested substituting definitions for labels (e.g., ‘child identified female at birth’
instead of girl) (Cordoba, 2022). Little research has been conducted on how people understand
definitions as similar or different from labels, and our study takes a step towards addressing this
gap.
4.3 Words as labels-for vs. creators-of categories revisited
We attempted to activate lexicalized categories using two types of non-label cues: exemplar lists
and definitions. For many terms, we found that neither of these cues was a sufficient substitute,
consistent with the perspective that words are creators of, rather than labels for, categories.
ELICITING SUPERORDINATE CATEGORIES 40
Given the variation that we observed across terms, however, and the substantial conflicting
literature reviewed in Section 1.1, we believe that a more useful question going forward is: what
are the factors that shape the relationship between words and non-linguistic cognition and
perception? That is, when is a word more or less necessary to make individual items cohere
together as a category?
We tested 20 superordinate terms in this study, an improvement over many previous
studies. Nonetheless, 20 terms are insufficient to gain a precise understanding of what factors
enhance or diminish the Label Advantage, or how multiple factors interact with each other. We
found that frequency and generality of the terms predicted some of our dependent measures, but
a variety of other factors may also play a role, including: degree of perceptual similarity of
category members, degree of functional similarity of category members, and the age at which
children learn the categories/terms. For those dependent measures where frequency and
generality did not interact with Cue Type, it is unclear whether these covariates are truly not
relevant, or whether we lacked the power to detect an effect. Future studies may successfully
address these questions. Our study does clearly demonstrate the importance of researchers
sampling a diverse range of terms when designing studies on concepts and categories, as not all
categories are alike. Likewise, our study points to the danger of cherry-picking examples to
substantiate theoretical claims: while members of an audience might intuitively accept that the
words banana, orange, and grapes activate “the concept FRUIT,” they would likely have more
difficulty accepting that the words breadsticks, mozzarella sticks, and soup activate “the concept
APPETIZERS.”
In light of our findings, we suggest that researchers avoid referring to concepts using
English words (or words from any other language), unless they cite empirical evidence that the
ELICITING SUPERORDINATE CATEGORIES 41
word functions as a label for an independently represented concept. This is a high bar to clear, as
even for those terms where we observed little Label Advantage (in the Exemplar condition: fruit,
vegetables, clothing, animals; in the Definition condition: clothing, mammals, toys, pets), the
terms could still be influencing people’s performance in the task. That is, if an exemplar list or a
definition activates a concept, and this concept is labeled by a word (e.g., fruit), then failing to
observe a Label Advantage could mean that the word labels an independent concept. However, if
an exemplar list or definition activates an ambiguous or indeterminate category, then participants
might draw on their linguistic resources to help them formulate the category. If participants
activate fruit in this way, we might fail to observe a Label Advantage, but this does not
necessarily mean that the word labels an independent concept. To be sure, exemplar lists and
definitions are only two ways of activating superordinate concepts, and different methods might
reveal strong evidence that words function as labels. Nonetheless, until such evidence has been
uncovered, we suggest that researchers maintain a distinction between concepts and lexical
semantics.
Acknowledgments
This research was supported by NSF PAC 2020969 awarded to G. Lupyan. Thank you to Kevin
Mui for JavaScript help. Thank you to Cognitive Science Society reviewers and to members of
the Lupyan Lab for their feedback on this work. Thank you to all study participants.
Disclosure of interest
The authors report no conflict of interest.
ELICITING SUPERORDINATE CATEGORIES 42
References
Balaban, M. T., & Waxman, S. R. (1997). Do words facilitate object categorization in 9-month-
old infants? Journal of Experimental Child Psychology, 64(1), 3-26.
Barsalou, L. W. (1982). Context-independent and context-dependent information in concepts.
Memory & cognition, 10(1), 82-93.
Bates, D., Maechler, M., Bolker, B., & Walker, S. (2014). lme4: Linear mixed-effects models
using S4 classes. R package version 1.1-7. URL http://CRAN. R-project. org/package=
lme4.
Blasi, D. E., Henrich, J., Adamou, E., Kemmerer, D., & Majid, A. (2022). Over-reliance on
English hinders cognitive science. Trends in cognitive sciences, 26(12), 1153-1170.
Bojanowski, P., Grave, E., Joulin, A., & Mikolov, T. (2017). Enriching Word Vectors with
Subword Information. Transactions of the Association for Computational Linguistics, 5,
135-146. doi:10.1162/tacl_a_00051
Boleda, G. (2020). Distributional Semantics and Linguistic Theory. Annual Review of
Linguistics, 6(1), 213-234. doi:10.1146/annurev-linguistics-011619-030303
Bolognesi, M. (2020). Where Words Get their Meaning: Cognitive processing and distributional
modelling of word meaning in first and second language (Vol. 23). Amsterdam;
Philadelphia: John Benjamins Publishing Company.
Cordoba, S. (2022). Non-binary Gender Identities: The Language of Becoming. Abingdon,
Oxon; New York, NY: Routledge, Taylor & Francis.
Davies, M. (2023). The Corpus of Contemporary American English: 450 million words, 1990-
present. from Available online at http://corpus.byu.edu/coca/.
ELICITING SUPERORDINATE CATEGORIES 43
Edmiston, P., & Lupyan, G. (2015). What makes words special? Words as unmotivated cues.
Cognition, 143, 93-100. doi:https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cognition.2015.06.008
Eimas, P. D., & Quinn, P. C. (1994). Studies on the formation of perceptually based basic‐level
categories in young infants. Child Development, 65(3), 903-917.
Elbourne, P. (2011). Meaning: a slim guide to semantics. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Enfield, N. (2022). Language vs. reality: Why language is good for lawyers and bad for
scientists. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Ferguson, B., & Waxman, S. R. (2017). Linking language and categorization in infancy. Journal
of Child language, 44(3), 527-552. doi:10.1017/S0305000916000568
Gendron, M., Roberson, D., van der Vyver, J. M., & Barrett, L. F. (2014). Perceptions of
emotion from facial expressions are not culturally universal: evidence from a remote
culture. Emotion, 14(2), 251.
Gentner, D., & Goldin-Meadow, S. (2003). Language in mind; advances in the study of language
and cognition. Cambridge, Mass.: MIT Press.
Gliozzi, V., Mayor, J., Hu, J.-F., & Plunkett, K. (2009). Labels as Features (Not Names) for
Infant Categorization: A Neurocomputational Approach. Cognitive Science, 33(4), 709-
738. doi:https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1551-6709.2009.01026.x
Goddard, C., & Wierzbicka, A. (2014). Words and Meanings: Lexical Semantics Across
Domains, Languages, and Cultures. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Havy, M., & Waxman, S. R. (2016). Naming influences 9-month-olds’ identification of discrete
categories along a perceptual continuum. Cognition, 156, 41-51.
Jackendoff, R. (1990). Semantic structures. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Keller, R. (1998). A theory of linguistic signs. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
ELICITING SUPERORDINATE CATEGORIES 44
Kemmerer, D. (2019). Concepts in the Brain: The View From Cross-linguistic Diversity. Oxford:
Oxford University Press.
Kemmerer, D. (2022). Grounded Cognition Entails Linguistic Relativity: A Neglected
Implication of a Major Semantic Theory. Topics in Cognitive Science, n/a(n/a).
doi:https://doi.org/10.1111/tops.12628
Kumar, A. A. (2021). Semantic memory: A review of methods, models, and current challenges.
Psychonomic bulletin & review, 28(1), 40-80. doi:https://doi.org/10.3758/s13423-020-
01792-x
Kuznetsova, A., Brockhoff, P. B., & Christensen, R. H. (2017). lmerTest package: tests in linear
mixed effects models. Journal of Statistical Software, 82(13), 1-26.
Levinson, S. C. (1997). From outer to inner space: linguistic categories and non-linguistic
thinking. In J. Nuyts & E. Pederson (Eds.), Language and conceptualization (pp. 13-45).
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Levinson, S. C., & Wilkins, D. P. (2006). Grammars of space: Explorations in cognitive
diversity (Vol. 6). Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Lewis, M., Colunga, E., & Lupyan, G. (2021). Superordinate Word Knowledge Predicts
Longitudinal Vocabulary Growth. Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive
Science Society, 43(43), 321-326.
Luke, S. G. (2017). Evaluating significance in linear mixed-effects models in R. Behavior
research methods, 49(4), 1494-1502. doi:10.3758/s13428-016-0809-y
Lupyan, G. (2012). Linguistically Modulated Perception and Cognition: The Label-Feedback
Hypothesis. Frontiers in Psychology, 3(54). doi:10.3389/fpsyg.2012.00054
ELICITING SUPERORDINATE CATEGORIES 45
Lupyan, G. (2016). The Centrality of Language in Human Cognition. Language Learning, 66(3),
516-553. doi:10.1111/lang.12155
Lupyan, G., Abdel Rahman, R., Boroditsky, L., & Clark, A. (2020). Effects of Language on
Visual Perception. Trends in cognitive sciences, 24(11), 930-944.
doi:https://doi.org/10.1016/j.tics.2020.08.005
Lupyan, G., & Thompson-Schill, S. L. (2012). The evocative power of words: activation of
concepts by verbal and nonverbal means. Journal of Experimental Psychology: General,
141(1), 170.
Majid, A., Roberts, S. G., Cilissen, L., Emmorey, K., Nicodemus, B., O’Grady, L., . . . Levinson,
S. C. (2018). Differential coding of perception in the world’s languages. Proceedings of
the National Academy of Sciences, 115(45), 11369-11376. doi:10.1073/pnas.1720419115
Malt, B. C. (1995). Category Coherence in Cross-Cultural Perspective. Cognitive psychology,
29(2), 85-148. doi:https://doi.org/10.1006/cogp.1995.1013
Malt, B. C. (2019). Words, thoughts, and brains. Cognitive Neuropsychology, 1-13.
doi:10.1080/02643294.2019.1599335
Malt, B. C., & Majid, A. (2013). How thought is mapped into words. Wiley Interdisciplinary
Reviews: Cognitive Science, 4(6), 583-597. doi:10.1002/wcs.1251
Malt, B. C., Sloman, S. A., Gennari, S., Shi, M., & Wang, Y. (1999). Knowing versus Naming:
Similarity and the Linguistic Categorization of Artifacts. Journal of Memory and
Language, 40(2), 230-262. doi:https://doi.org/10.1006/jmla.1998.2593
Martin, A. (2016). GRAPES—Grounding representations in action, perception, and emotion
systems: How object properties and categories are represented in the human brain.
Psychonomic bulletin & review, 23(4), 979-990.
ELICITING SUPERORDINATE CATEGORIES 46
Mauri, C. (2017). Building and Interpreting Ad Hoc Categories: A Linguistic Analysis. In J.
Blochowiak, C. Grisot, S. Durrleman, & C. Laenzlinger (Eds.), Formal Models in the
Study of Language: Applications in Interdisciplinary Contexts (pp. 297-326). Cham:
Springer International Publishing.
Mauri, C., & Sansò, A. (2018). Linguistic strategies for ad hoc categorization: theoretical
assessment and cross-linguistic variation. Folia Linguistica Historica, 52(39), 1-35.
doi:10.1515/flih-2018-0001
Mihatsch, W. (2007). Taxonomic and meronomic superordinates with nominal coding. In A. C.
Schalley & D. Zaefferer (Eds.), Ontolinguistics: How Ontological Status Shapes the
Linguistic Coding of Concepts (pp. 359-377). Berlin: Walter de Gruyter.
Nelson, K. (1988). Where do taxonomic categories come from? Human Development, 31(1), 3-
10.
Nelson, K. (1996). Language in cognitive development : emergence of the mediated mind:
Cambridge; New York: Cambridge University Press, 1996.
Patterson, K., Nestor, P. J., & Rogers, T. T. (2007). Where do you know what you know? The
representation of semantic knowledge in the human brain. Nature Reviews Neuroscience,
8(12), 976-987.
Pomiechowska, B., & Gliga, T. (2018). Lexical Acquisition Through Category Matching: 12-
Month-Old Infants Associate Words to Visual Categories. Psychological Science, 30(2),
288-299. doi:10.1177/0956797618817506
Pustejovsky, J. (1995). The generative lexicon. Cambridge, Mass.: MIT Press.
ELICITING SUPERORDINATE CATEGORIES 47
R Core Team. (2022). R: A language and environment for statistical computing. Retrieved from
https://www.R-project.org/. from R Foundation for Statistical Computing https://www.R-
project.org/.
Ralph, M. A. L., Jefferies, E., Patterson, K., & Rogers, T. T. (2017). The neural and
computational bases of semantic cognition. Nature Reviews Neuroscience, 18(1), 42-55.
Rissman, L., Liu, Q., & Lupyan, G. (2023). Gaps in the lexicon restrict communication. Open
Mind, 1-23.
Rissman, L., & Lupyan, G. (2021). Lions, tigers and bears: Conveying a superordinate category
without a superordinate label. Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive
Science Society, 43(43).
Rissman, L., van Putten, S., & Majid, A. (2022). Evidence for a shared instrument prototype
from English, Dutch and German. Cognitive Science, 46, e13140.
Rogers, T. T., & McClelland, J. L. (2004). Semantic cognition: A parallel distributed processing
approach. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Rosch, E., Mervis, C. B., Gray, W. D., Johnson, D. M., & Boyes-Braem, P. (1976). Basic objects
in natural categories. Cognitive psychology, 8(3), 382-439.
doi:https://doi.org/10.1016/0010-0285(76)90013-X
Ross, B. H., & Murphy, G. L. (1999). Food for thought: Cross-classification and category
organization in a complex real-world domain. Cognitive psychology, 38(4), 495-553.
Sloutsky, V. M., Lo, Y.-F., & Fisher, A. V. (2001). How Much Does a Shared Name Make
Things Similar? Linguistic Labels, Similarity, and the Development of Inductive
Inference. Child Development, 72(6), 1695-1709. Retrieved from
http://www.jstor.org/stable/3654373
ELICITING SUPERORDINATE CATEGORIES 48
Snodgrass, J. (1984). Concepts and their surface representations. Journal of Verbal Learning and
Verbal Behavior, 23(1), 3-22. doi:https://doi.org/10.1016/S0022-5371(84)90479-1
Thompson, B., Roberts, S. G., & Lupyan, G. (2020). Cultural influences on word meanings
revealed through large-scale semantic alignment. Nature Human Behaviour, 4(10), 1029-
1038.
van Paridon, J., & Thompson, B. (2020). subs2vec: Word embeddings from subtitles in 55
languages. Behavior research methods, 53, 629-655. doi:10.3758/s13428-020-01406-3
Waxman, S. R., & Gelman, R. (1986). Preschoolers' use of superordinate relations in
classification and language. Cognitive Development, 1(2), 139-156.
doi:https://doi.org/10.1016/S0885-2014(86)80016-8
Waxman, S. R., & Markow, D. B. (1995). Words as invitations to form categories: Evidence
from 12-to 13-month-old infants. Cognitive psychology, 29(3), 257-302.
Westermann, G., & Mareschal, D. (2014). From perceptual to language-mediated categorization.
Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society B: Biological Sciences, 369(1634),
20120391. doi:doi:10.1098/rstb.2012.0391
Wisniewski, E. J., Imai, M., & Casey, L. (1996). On the equivalence of superordinate concepts.
Cognition, 60(3), 269-298. doi:https://doi.org/10.1016/0010-0277(96)00707-X
Yu, C.-P., Maxfield, J. T., & Zelinsky, G. J. (2016). Searching for Category-Consistent
Features:A Computational Approach to Understanding Visual Category Representation.
Psychological Science, 27(6), 870-884. doi:10.1177/0956797616640237
Zettersten, M., & Lupyan, G. (2020). Finding categories through words: More nameable features
improve category learning. Cognition, 196, 104135.
doi:https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cognition.2019.104135
ELICITING SUPERORDINATE CATEGORIES 49
Appendix
Similarity to Centroid Analysis Using Word Embeddings
As a replication of the typicality ratings analysis in Section 2.8.2, we used word embeddings to
analyze the centrality of the responses to the superordinate terms. We calculated the centroid of
each superordinate term by selecting the eight most typical responses for each term (as indicated
by the typicality ratings) and averaging the vectors of these responses. For example, we
calculated the centroid of the term desserts by averaging the individual vectors for chocolate
cake, lemon meringue pie, chocolate pudding, strawberry shortcake, and four other typical
desserts. We then calculated the similarity between each individual response and the term
centroid.7 This measure complements the typicality ratings analyzed in Section 2.8.2, as
similarity in word embedding space is based on statistics of word usage, rather than intuitions
about typicality.
The mean similarity of each response relative to the centroid for each superordinate term
is shown in Figure 6. As with the typicality analysis, we fit separate models for the
Label/Exemplar vs. Label/Definition data, using sum contrast coding for the Cue Type variable.
In the Label vs. Exemplar model, responses in the Label condition were more similar to the
centroid than responses in the Exemplar condition (β = .047, CI95 = [.016, .078], t = 3.00, p
< .01) and responses decreased in their similarity to the centroid as Response Number increased
7 We adopted this approach rather than compare each response to the term itself (e.g., the similarity between
cheesecake and dessert). As the superordinate terms are in a hierarchical level above the responses, the
superordinate terms are not necessarily used in the same contexts as typical examples of those terms (e.g. cake and
desserts are used in different contexts). For this reason, the average of highly typical examples is likely a better
representation of the central tendency of the category in word embedding space than the word itself. See Rissman
and Lupyan (2021) for a comparison of the similarity between the responses and the superordinate terms. They
found that responses were more similar to the superordinate term in the Label condition than in the Exemplar
condition.
ELICITING SUPERORDINATE CATEGORIES 50
(β = -0.047, CI95 = [-0.071, -0.023], t = -3.84, p < .001). In the Label vs. Definition model,
responses in the Label condition were more similar to the centroid than responses in the
Definition condition (β = .087, CI95 = [.033, .141], t = 3.17, p < .01) and responses decreased in
their similarity to the centroid as Response Number increased (β = -.21, CI95 = [-.23, -.19], t = -
24.20, p < .001). In both models, adding the interaction between Cue Type and Response
Number did not increase model fit. As with the typicality ratings, we see a Label Advantage:
when participants were not given labels for the superordinate categories, their responses were
less central to the structure of the category.
Figure 6. Mean centroid similarity of responses, grouped by Cue Type and Response
Number (Experiment 1A: Label and Exemplar conditions; Experiment 1B: Definition
condition). Error bars show 95% confidence intervals of the mean.
ELICITING SUPERORDINATE CATEGORIES 51
Figure 7 shows, for individual terms, the mean similarity between responses and category
centroids for each Cue Type. The advantage of labels over exemplars was largest for toys and
mammals and smallest for clothing and pets. The advantage of labels over definitions was largest
for flowers and diseases and smallest for mammals and toys. In models of the Label/Exemplar
and Label/Definition data, neither the frequency and nor the generality of the terms interacted
with Cue Type (p’s > .1). The ratings difference between our Turker-generated definitions and
dictionary definitions did not significantly interact with Cue Type (p > .1).
ELICITING SUPERORDINATE CATEGORIES 52
Figure 7. Mean centroid similarity of responses, grouped by Cue Type and superordinate term
(Experiment 1A: Label and Exemplar conditions; Experiment 1B: Definition condition).
Terms are grouped by lower vs. higher frequency. Darker colors indicate a stronger Label
Advantage for that term.
