INTRODUCTION
According to the 2017 National Survey on Drug Use and Health (NSDUH) an estimated
11.4 million people misused opioids with approximately 2.1 million people having an opioid
use disorder.1 That same year, approximately 1 in 4 young adults aged 18 to 25 were current
illicit drug users. Irrespective of age, the 2017 estimates of current illicit drug use are
primarily driven by the use of marijuana and misuse of prescription pain relievers such as
opioids. With growing numbers of illicit drug use among young adults aged 18 to 25, college
students represent a crucial age group with exposure to opioid pain relievers and potentially
adverse consequences.1
Opioid use among college students is a serious public health concern. Given college culture,
it is unsurprisingly that many students are at increased exposure to drugs including tobacco,
alcohol, stimulants, and opioids.2 Use of other substances such as marijuana, alcohol, and
stimulants are among the risk factors for heroin use.2 An early report found that opioid use
among college students, primarily driven by an increased use of heroin, increased by 343%
between 1993 and 2005; with more than 50% of college students being offered a
prescription drug for nonmedical purposes by their sophomore year.2 Furthermore, a study
conducted in 2014 found that approximately 12% of college students reported lifetime
nonmedical use of prescription opioid analgesics, 7% reported nonmedical use in the past
year, and 3% reported nonmedical use in the past month.3 Given the high addiction potential
of opioids and risk of immediate severe consequences such as overdose; overdose education
and prevention efforts are essential among college students.4,5
In addition to rising numbers of individuals using opioids, there is also a dramatic increase
in the risk of opioid related overdose.6 In part this is a result of the unpredictability of
substances present in illicit drugs but also a rise in number of individuals receiving higher
doses of prescription opioids for long-term management of chronic pain.7 Even when taking
opioid medications as prescribed, risk of accidental overdose remains a concern, especially
when considering the risk of drug-drug interactions.7,8 To combat this growing crisis the
surgeon general and Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) recommend
expanding the awareness and availability of naloxone, an opioid agonist to temporarily
reverse the effects of an opioid overdose.6,7,9-11 Several research studies have shown that
when overdose education programs and naloxone are available to community members,
those communities experience decreases in overdose related deaths.12-14 In most states,
people who are or who know someone at risk for opioid overdose can go to a pharmacy or
community-based program, to get trained on naloxone administration, and receive naloxone
without a patient-specific prescription.15 Furthermore, most states have laws designed to
protect health care professionals for prescribing and dispensing naloxone from civil and
criminal liabilities as well as Good Samaritan laws to protect people who administer
naloxone or call for help during an opioid overdose emergency.15,16 Naloxone is
increasingly being used by police officers, emergency medical technicians, and non-
emergency first responders to reverse opioid overdoses; however, too few community
members are aware of the important role they can play to save lives.
While this crisis has spread nationwide, certain areas are disproportionately affected by the
opioid epidemic. In February 2017, an analysis from the West Virginia Health Statistics
Center showed that at least 818 people in the state died of drug overdoses in 2016–a nearly
13% increase from 201517 and of those deaths in 2016, approximately 86% involved at least
one opioid.18 In 2017, West Virginia remained the state with the highest prescription opioid-
involved death rates with 17.2 per 100,00019 and heroin overdose deaths with 14.9 per
100,000.19 Furthermore, the state also led the country in synthetic opioid related deaths with
37.4 per 100,000.19 This continues a multi-year streak leading the country in opioid-related
deaths.
The objective of this study is to investigate opioid overdose knowledge among college
students in a high-risk, high opioid exposure state. West Virginia University (WVU) student
knowledge about identifying an opioid overdose and resources available in the event of an
overdose emergency were evaluated using the opioid overdose knowledge scale (OOKS).
We hypothesize that the target population (college students in a high risk state) will be
under-educated in terms of identifying opioid overdose signs and symptoms, knowing what
to do in an overdose emergency, and identifying resources related to opioid overdose.
METHODS
Sample and Design
A cross-sectional study of 214 WVU students was conducted using an online survey
administered via an anonymous, public link. Participants were asked to complete a 36-
question survey estimated to take approximately 10 minutes. It was administered
independently of concurrent available naloxone training opportunities across the WVU
campus. Responses were recorded in the online REDCap system,20 a secure web application
for building and managing online surveys and databases. Survey dissemination utilized
university list-servers of electronic mailing lists for students the WVU Main and Health
Sciences Campuses. Other electronic dispersion methods such as posting to university group
webpages, collaborating with the student health organizations, and snowballing techniques
were also utilized.
Study participants had to be 18 years of age or older, and able to speak and understand the
English language. Participants were informed about the confidentiality of their responses
initially, and again prior to initiation of the study survey. Ethical approval for this study was
granted and on file with the WVU Institutional Review Board.
Measures
Sociodemographic information.—Participants were asked, via self-report, their age (in
years), race, ethnicity, and relationship status. Participants were questioned on their access to
healthcare in the dichotomous, yes/no form of “Do you have any kind of health care
coverage, including health insurance, prepaid plans such as HMOs, or government plans
such as Medicare?”
Opioid Overdose Knowledge Scale.—The Opioid Overdose Knowledge Scale
(OOKS) is a structured self-completion questionnaire.21 The scale consists of multiple-
choice response items to classify changes in knowledge about overdose identification and
management. The scale was originally administered family and friends of heroin users as
well as healthcare professionals. It was originally assessed for internal reliability by
Williams et al (2013; Cronbach’s alpha=0.83) and was found to be suitable in measuring
outcomes of take-home naloxone training among family and friends of opioid users.21 The
questionnaire also assessed previous experience dealing with an overdose, willingness, and
confidence in administering naloxone.
Additional Questions.—In addition to the OOKS, several additional questions were
selected to better understand the sample population. Questions regarding previous exposure
to opioid medication such as: “Have you ever received a prescription for opioids (example:
Vicodin®, tramadol, Oxycontin®, hydrocodone, morphine, etc.)?” and additional substance
use questions were included to assess alcohol, cigarette and other tobacco use. Questions to
evaluate nonmedical substances use such as opioids, stimulants, depressants, hallucinogens,
and other substance of potential abuse were also included.
Questions regarding witnessing an opioid overdose, number of opioid overdoses witnessed,
actions taken during such event(s) were included. Finally, participants were asked if they
were aware of West Virginia’s “Good Samaritan Law”22 or if they had ever attended a
naloxone/substance abuse training course or program. These questions were asked to
identify a subset of the general population that may have prior opioid emergency training
(i.e., first responders, health care providers, etc.).
Statistical Analyses
Descriptive statistics (frequencies and means) were calculated for gender, age, race, and
substance to characterize the sample. Health insurance coverage (yes/no), attendance,
receiving naloxone training (yes/no), awareness of West Virginia Good Samaritan law (yes/
no), working or studying in a health field (yes/no) and ever receiving a prescription for an
opioid medication (yes/no/unsure) were also accounted for in the sample. The OOKS scores
were calculated for each of the four domains (knowledge of risk factors, signs of an
overdose, actions to take, and naloxone) based on the OOKS scoring manual.21 A composite
score out of 45 total points was calculated for total OOKS score for each respondent. T-tests
were used to compare OOKS scores for participants receiving naloxone training and
participants who did not receive naloxone training. Additional t-tests were used to compare
participants who received a previous prescription for opioids compared to participants who
had never received a prescription. Ten participants were unsure whether they had previously
received a prescription for an opioid and were excluded from this analysis. Data was
analyzed using STATA (14.0).23
RESULTS
The study sample was 72.5% female (n=137), 90% Caucasian (n=193), and has a mean age
of 24.8 years old (range: 18-69 years). A majority of the sample endorsed consuming 1-6
alcoholic beverages per week (40.4%) and never smokers (78.9%). Additional substance use
for the sample is included in Table 1.
Thirty-four students received naloxone training (15.9%). When compared to students who
did not receive naloxone training, students with previous naloxone training scored
significantly better on the risk, signs, action, and naloxone domains (Table 2). Overall
students with naloxone training had a total OOKS score of 36.2 (SD=3.23) compared to 29.9
(SD=5.22) students without training (p<0.001).
Sixty-three students surveyed reported being in a health field. Compared to students who
were in non-health programs students who were enrolled in a health-related major
performed significantly higher on the OOKS subdomains signs, actions, and naloxone
(Table 3). However, there was no statistically significant difference between their scores on
the risk subdomain. Overall, students enrolled in health-related studies had a higher mean
OOKS score of 33.7 (SD= 4.3) compared to 29.8 (SD=5.4) for students in non-health
programs (p<0.00).
One-hundred and eleven students have previously received a prescription opioid; ninety-
three students had never received an opioid prescription and ten students were unsure. The
ten students who were unsure if they ever received a prescription for an opioid and were
excluded from the analysis, leaving a total sample of n=204 for this particular analysis.
When compared to students with no previous prescription opioid, students with previous
opioid prescriptions scored significantly higher on OOKS signs, action, and naloxone
subdomains (Table 4). Overall, students with previous opioid prescriptions had a
significantly higher OOKS total score of 32.3 (SD=4.6) compared to 29.6 (SD=6.0) for
students without a previous opioid prescription (p<0.001). Previous receipt of a prescription
opioid was the only substance use that show statistically significant differences between
groups on OOKS performance.
Additionally, 6.7% of our sample (n=14) previously witnessed an overdose. Students who
witnessed an overdose scored significantly higher on OOKS subdomains for signs (p<0.01)
and action (p<0.05). There were no significant differences for OOKS subdomain scores for
risk or naloxone (Table 5). However, students who previously witnessed an overdose had a
total mean OOKS score of 34.2 (SD= 4.4) compared to 30.9 (SD= 5.4) for students who had
never witnessed an overdose which is statistically significant (p<0.05).
DISCUSSION
Opioid overdose education and naloxone distribution have been effective at reducing
overdose death rates in community settings.13,14,24 Similar educational programs and
widespread availability of naloxone kits in college campuses can also help to reduce this
problem. However, most knowledge assessment studies have been conducted primarily in
clinical health settings, and among current opioid users. Awareness of knowledge gaps
surrounding knowledge about the resources available in overdose emergency situations
could prove very helpful in providing lifesaving interventions.
College students with naloxone training scored higher on opioid overdose risk, signs, action,
and naloxone administration scales. However, only a small portion of our study sample had
attended such training despite attending school in a high death risk state. While students
with previous opioid prescription scored better overall on all domains compared to those
who had not previously received an opioid prescription, their lowest score was on the action
subdomain. This indicates that while students know how to identify an opioid overdose,
more training is needed regarding what actions are necessary to take in the event of
witnessing an overdose.
Prescription drug misuse and related overdose deaths in college campuses have gone up
substantially in recent years.25 Recent state legislature changes have improved layperson
access to naloxone in order to reduce drug overdose deaths.7,12,26,27 However, acceptance
and availability of naloxone in college communities has been hindered due to denial of risk,
stigma, and lack of awareness or resources.28 Training and educating campus police
departments and students, making naloxone kits available next to fire extinguishers in case
of emergencies, and distributing information online can all be utilized to reduce the problem
of overdose deaths in and around college campuses and in communities. It can not only
improve risk behaviors of students taking the training but also empower them to intervene in
an overdose situation making an impact on the whole community. Our study shows that
student who take naloxone training are equipped with knowledge to tackle an overdose if
they are to witness one. However, such trainings are not provided by all universities; and as
see in our study, the overall percentage of students reporting participation in such training
programs is low, which may represent an additional barrier.
Results from our study also demonstrate that students with prior exposure to opioid
prescriptions (as measured by self-report of receipt of previous opioid prescription), scored
better on the OOKS than students who had not previously received an opioid prescription.
This could be explained by several factors. It is possible that students who previously
received an opioid prescription were also educated by their health care provider (i.e.
physician, pharmacist etc.) about the potential risks associated with opioid medication and
the proper use of their medication. Additionally, students who received an opioid
prescription would be likely to have multiple points of contact in the healthcare system. For
example, the doctor who prescribed the medication and the pharmacist who would distribute
the medication. This would allow for several points of intervention where the person could
be educated on the appropriate use as well as the potentials risks associated with prescription
opioids. Another plausible explanation is that in light of the ongoing opioid epidemic,
students were more aware of the intrinsic risks associated with opioid prescriptions and upon
being prescribed an opioid were more inclined to research these risks on their own
increasing their knowledge related to opioid overdose.
We acknowledge several potential limitations to this study. First, the survey was restricted to
online distribution, no other dissemination methods were utilized; limiting our sample size
to students who check and have access to internet services. Second, this study is
observational in nature and this is open to the limitations of such designs including self-
report and reporting bias. The cross-sectional design of the survey does not allow us to make
any claims about causality. Furthermore, there was no intrinsic safeguards to prevent the
same student from taking the survey twice because of the anonymous nature of the survey.
Third, questions regarding marijuana use were not included due to an oversight in survey
construction, yielding an incomplete picture of substance use in this sample. Finally,
students at WVU are attending an institution in a state that is at the epicenter of the opioid
epidemic which may skew results of this study. Since we did not account for student’s place
of origin (i.e. home city, country, or zip code of residence) we could not analyze knowledge
gaps based on students residing in WV versus outside of the state.

CONCLUSIONS
College students with naloxone training or previous prescription opioid use have higher
opioid overdose knowledge than their counterparts. However, all students showed a lack of
knowledge about proper actions to take in case of an opioid overdose. Naloxone education
and training programs need to emphasize the such aspects by not only focusing educational
training on education about overdose risk, but how bystanders should react in these
situations. Our study shows that while students do demonstrate key aspects of knowledge
associated with signs and risks associated with opioid overdose, overall student participation
in naloxone training programs was low. Ultimately, while naloxone training is effective for
increasing student knowledge about signs, risks, actions, and naloxone administration,
greater effort needs to be put forth to engage students in these training programs especially
given the number of students with previous exposure to opioid medications. Thus, a shift in
focus to engage students in naloxone trainings may be more appropriate than altering the
trainings themselves at this time.

