DEPARTMENT OF PSYCHOLOGY, COLLEGE OF LIBERAL ARTS
ROCHESTER INSTITUTE OF TECHNOLOGY
PSYC 714/ISEE 732—GRADUATE ENGINEERING PSYCHOLOGY
LAB#5 INSTRUCTIONS: MANUAL CONTROL
PROF. RANTANEN
March 17, 2024
The goals of this lab are to allow you to empirically investigate the impact of various variables on your
performance in both discrete and continuous control. This lab will allow you to design your own experiment
and manipulate any variable(s) relevant to control theory to demonstrate the validity of the theory,
1 Directions to Execute
1. Download the zip folder Lab5_V2 and copy all the contents to the same directory.
2. Make sure your computer has Python3 with library PsychoPy.3.
3. To run, open the program ManualControlLab.py in PsychoPy and click Run.
4. To close the program during experiment, press any key.
5. At any graphical prompt, enter the values and press “Start” to start the experiment and “Cancel” to go
back.
6. The program may take some time to load, please be patient and do not cancel before it loads.
7. Note: To move cursor in Compensatory Tracking 0-order, the left mouse button must be held down.
The cursor will not move if the left mouse button is not held down.
8. Documentation: PsychoPy https://www.psychopy.org/
2 Variables and Values
1. Width : Any value between 0 and 1 can be given. Recommended value 0–0.5, any value higher causes
the right side of the target to be out of bounds.
2. Amplitude : Any value between −0.2 and 1.8 can be given. Recommended value 1–1.4. Negative
value will cause the crosshair to be on the right of the target. Positive value will put the cursor on the
left of the target.
3. Gain: Any value. Recommended value 1.
4. Capture Time: Enter Capture time in seconds. Example: 2.5 or 3.1
1
3 Lab Report
Write a lab report according to the separate instructions (“Lab Report Template”). Note that if you design
your own experiment and tweak the code accordingly, you must describe what you did and how you did it
in great detail.
4 Deadline
The complete lab report is due in a designated dropbox folder in myCourses on Sunday, April 7, at midnight.
2
