DEPARTMENT OF PSYCHOLOGY, COLLEGE OF LIBERAL ARTS
ROCHESTER INSTITUTE OF TECHNOLOGY
PSYC 714/ISEE 732—GRADUATE ENGINEERING PSYCHOLOGY
HANDOUT: MANUAL CONTROL
PROF. RANTANEN
March 16, 2024
1 Preliminaries
There are several important factors that must be understood and considered when examining control systems:
• Discrete of continuous control
• Open- or closed-loop control
• Positive or negative feedback
• Stability
• Control order (zero-, first-, or second-order control)
• Time delays (lags)
• Gain
• Tracking displays (pursuit or compensatory tracking)
To put control in context, consider the model of human information processing system and some system
to be controlled (a nuclear power plant, an airplane, even your automobile); the human operator needs and
interface between him or her and the system. The interface must necessarily have two parts, (1) displays to
convey information about the system’s state (e.g., the speed the car is traveling on a freeway) to the operator,
and (2) controls by which the operator can change the state of the system (e.g., accelerator and steering in a
car). See Figure 1 for an illustration.
Another important concept to note is the stimulus-response (S-R) compatibility are the departures from
the information theory assumptions. S-R compatibility is defined as “the expected relationship between the
location of a control or movement of a control response and the location or movement of the stimulus or
display to which the control is related.” Good S-R compatibility reduces response time by reducing the
uncertainty associated with appropriate movement of the control. Departures from the information theory
include stimulus discriminability (e.g., consider 4 and 7 vs. 721834 and 721837; the former would result in
faster responses because of the greater discriminability), the repetition effect (advantage over alternations),
confusability and complexity of the stimuli, and practice effects.
1
Figure 1. The model of human information processing in context.
2 Speed-Accuracy Tradeoff and Fitts’ Law
Fitts’ idea was to determine the information capacity of the human motor system, relying on the metaphor
of information transmission. According to this metaphoric account the difficulty of a task can be measured
in bits, familiar from the communication theory of Shannon and Weaver (1949). In carrying out a movement
task information is transmitted through a human channel.
A measure of difficulty of the task is the index of difficulty (ID), usually expressed as:
ID = log2
( 2A
W
)
(1)
where A is the movement amplitude and W is the target width. Thus, large movements to narrow targets
are more difficult than small movements to wide targets. Fitts’ index of performance (IP) is analogous to
Shannon’s channel capacity and is calculated as:
IP = ID
M T (2)
where M T is the observed movement time. IP can also be calculated by regressing M T on ID, resulting
in an equation of the regression line:
M T = a + b(ID) (3)
where a and b are the regression coefficients. Hence, Fitts’ law usually takes the form
M T = a + b log2
( 2A
W
)
(4)
where a is the y-intercept and b is the slope of the line.
Figure 2 illustrates the Fitts’ task and the law like relationship between target width (accuracy require-
ment), movement amplitude, and movement time (speed).
Example: Consider two different controls: A trackball and a joystick; one could devise and perform the Fitts’
2


