DEPARTMENT OF PSYCHOLOGY, COLLEGE OF LIBERAL ARTS
ROCHESTER INSTITUTE OF TECHNOLOGY
PSYC 714/ISEE 732—GRADUATE ENGINEERING PSYCHOLOGY
HANDOUT: MANUAL CONTROL
PROF. RANTANEN
March 16, 2024
1 Preliminaries
There are several important factors that must be understood and considered when examining control systems:
• Discrete of continuous control
• Open- or closed-loop control
• Positive or negative feedback
• Stability
• Control order (zero-, first-, or second-order control)
• Time delays (lags)
• Gain
• Tracking displays (pursuit or compensatory tracking)
To put control in context, consider the model of human information processing system and some system
to be controlled (a nuclear power plant, an airplane, even your automobile); the human operator needs and
interface between him or her and the system. The interface must necessarily have two parts, (1) displays to
convey information about the system’s state (e.g., the speed the car is traveling on a freeway) to the operator,
and (2) controls by which the operator can change the state of the system (e.g., accelerator and steering in a
car). See Figure 1 for an illustration.
Another important concept to note is the stimulus-response (S-R) compatibility are the departures from
the information theory assumptions. S-R compatibility is defined as “the expected relationship between the
location of a control or movement of a control response and the location or movement of the stimulus or
display to which the control is related.” Good S-R compatibility reduces response time by reducing the
uncertainty associated with appropriate movement of the control. Departures from the information theory
include stimulus discriminability (e.g., consider 4 and 7 vs. 721834 and 721837; the former would result in
faster responses because of the greater discriminability), the repetition effect (advantage over alternations),
confusability and complexity of the stimuli, and practice effects.
1
Figure 1. The model of human information processing in context.
2 Speed-Accuracy Tradeoff and Fitts’ Law
Fitts’ idea was to determine the information capacity of the human motor system, relying on the metaphor
of information transmission. According to this metaphoric account the difficulty of a task can be measured
in bits, familiar from the communication theory of Shannon and Weaver (1949). In carrying out a movement
task information is transmitted through a human channel.
A measure of difficulty of the task is the index of difficulty (ID), usually expressed as:
ID = log2
 2A
W

(1)
where A is the movement amplitude and W is the target width. Thus, large movements to narrow targets
are more difficult than small movements to wide targets. Fitts’ index of performance (IP) is analogous to
Shannon’s channel capacity and is calculated as:
IP = ID
M T (2)
where M T is the observed movement time. IP can also be calculated by regressing M T on ID, resulting
in an equation of the regression line:
M T = a + b(ID) (3)
where a and b are the regression coefficients. Hence, Fitts’ law usually takes the form
M T = a + b log2
 2A
W

(4)
where a is the y-intercept and b is the slope of the line.
Figure 2 illustrates the Fitts’ task and the law like relationship between target width (accuracy require-
ment), movement amplitude, and movement time (speed).
Example: Consider two different controls: A trackball and a joystick; one could devise and perform the Fitts’
2
task with different accuracy requirements (W ) and thus IDs with each, and compute M T = a + b(ID).
Suppose that the slope b turns out much smaller for the trackball than for the joystick; what would that tell
about the two different controls? Which would be better?
Figure 2. The Fitts’ task and the law like relationship between target width (accuracy requirement), move-
ment amplitude, and movement time (speed).
Despite its simplicity, Fitts’ Law is immensely influential and useful in many aspects of human-machine
interaction. Consider the common input device of alphanumeric keyboards. The common QWERTY key-
board is difficult to use, for it has over 50% within-hand consecutive keystrokes, over 60% of keystrokes
away from the “home-row”, and 10% of keystrokes that require moving a single hand two rows from the
“home-row” (for typing in English). All these factors work to increase movement time, i.e., to slow typing
speed (but then, that was the very purpose of the keyboard design!). QWERTY also has uneven distribution
of strokes among the fingers resulting in overload of some fingers. The Dvorak keyboard has 5%–20%
speed advantage over QWERTY and reduced hand and finger fatigue, but cost and effort of retraining the
population (changing a standard) are important considerations, too.
Of the two kinds of numeric keypads (“telephone”, which has 1-2-3 on the top row, and “calculator”, which
has 7-8-9 on the top row), the telephone arrangement has been shown to be slightly faster than calculator
arrangement. Alternating between keypads resulted in poorest performance.
A specific application of Fitts’ Law is in the GOMS (Goals, Operators, Methods, and Selection rules) Model.
GOMS is an HCI model developed by Stuart Card, Thomas P. Moran, and Allen Newell [1]. Goals are what
the user intends to accomplish, operator is an action performed in service of a goal, method is a sequence
of operators that accomplish a goal, and selection rule is to choose among more than one method available
to accomplish a goal (a.k.a. CMN-GOMS, where CMN = Card, Moran, Newell).
A Keystroke Level Model (KLM) GOMS is a simplified version CMN-GOMS, eliminating the goals, meth-
ods, and selection rules, leaving only 6 primitive operators: (1) pressing a key, (2) moving the pointing
device to a specific location, (3) pointer drag movements, (4) mental preparation, (5) moving hands to ap-
propriate locations, and (6) waiting for the computer to execute a command. The times for each of the six
operations determined empirically by Fitts’ Law. The operations for a compete task are arranged into a
serial stream, and total task execution time is a simple calculation.
3
3 Continuous Control and Tracking
Continuous control means continuous tracking and correction of errors, that is, deviations from some set
point or criterion state of the system (e.g., consider lane keeping while driving a car). Control systems are
often automated (e.g., a thermostat, or even a toilet tank that automatically shuts off water when the tank is
full). For illustration of simple control systems, see Figure 3.Pneumatic
controller
Setpoint
Pneumatic
control valve
Controller output Input
flow
rate
Measured
level signal
Σ Error
Level measuring
means
Level
system
Level
Output
flow
Level measuring means
Measured
level signal
Setpoint
Pneumatic controller
Input
flow
Control
valve
Controller output
Display
Target
Cursor
Human
operator Control
System
or
Plant
Command
Input
Disturbance input
ic(t)
e(t) f(t) u(t) o(t)
id(t)
Figure 3. Block diagram of a simple control system. It is also easy to include the human operator in models
like this and represent him or her by some appropriate transfer function.
3.1 Feedback
Examples of positive feedback include a booster rocket, or backing a tractor-trailer. Response error is to the
same direction as the error. These systems are very difficult to control (as anyone who has tried to back up
a tractor-trailer combination can attest) and typically not suitable for human control. In negative feedback
systems response to error is opposite (= negative) to the error (e.g., lane-keeping while driving: if the car is
drifting to the left, the driver will turn the steering wheel to the right). We quickly learn to control a negative
feedback system without even thinking about it (i.e., automatically).
3.2 Stability
This concept should be familiar to everyone from high school physics. Figure 4 offers an illustration.
4
Figure 4. Which aircraft (Cessna C-150 on the top, Lockheed F-104 on the bottom) appears more stable and
thus easier to control?.
3.3 Control Order
Zero-order or position control refers to a direct change in system as a result of a change in some control.
For example, movement of a computer mouse results in a corresponding movement of the cursor on the
screen, or a turn of a steering wheel in a car results in the front wheels turning to some angle away from
their straight position.
First order, or velocity control has the control input result in a start of a change in the system. For ex-
ample, changing the position of the steering wheel of a car (= input) results in a rate of change of the
heading of the automobile (=output); to stop the car from turning, the steering wheel must be returned to the
neutral (center) position. The scanner in a car radio works the same way, continually jumping from station
to station and it must be stopped at a desired station. Also joysticks are 1st order controllers.
Second order or acceleration control results in increasing (i.e., accelerating) response of the system. For
example, turning a steering wheel results in an increasing distance of the car relative to the lane. Balancing
an empty soda can on a board is also an example of 2nd order control. First and second-order systems also
have inherent time lags, making their control very difficult (See Fig. 5).
Figure 5. Different responses in 0-, 1st-, and 2nd order control systems. The dashed lines represent control
input, solid lines system response. Note that time lags are inherent to 1st- and 2nd order systems.
3.4 Time Lags
Time delays are always harmful. The greater the delay, the poorer the performance. Time lags require
anticipation of system responses, which in turn requires cognitive resources and is generally imperfectly
5
done. Figure 6 illustrates the role of time lags. Note that also 0-order systems may have time lags, depending
on the system design. Figure 7 illustrates the complex control inputs required for 1st and 2nd order systems.
Figure 6. The role of time lags in control systems.
Figure 7. The required control inputs for 1st and 2nd order systems. Note the complexity of control of the
2nd order system and anticipation required to achieve the desired system state.
3.5 Gain
Gain is the ratio of system output to control input. High gain may results in overcorrection and loss of
accuracy, whereas low gain makes control effortful and slow. An example is different steering ratios of
different automobiles. Generally, a “happy medium” of gain affords best performance. Note that gain can
also be variable, such as speed-sensitive steering in some cars of in computer track pads.
3.6 Tracking
There are two distinct types of tracking, pursuit tracking and compensatory tracking. Pursuit tracking has
independent representation of movement of both target and cursor (control). In compensatory tracking only
the movement of error relative to a fixed reference is displayed (e.g., flight instruments).
6
Tracking tasks can be aided by preview, allowing for prediction of the command input For example, preview
of the road ahead in driving makes the lane keeping task quite easy, especially when compared to trying to
maintain position on the lane by watching the lane edge marking from the side window of a car (do not try
this at home!). Output prediction and quickening may also be used in displays to aid operators. Predictive
displays show the future state of the system; see for an example Figure 8 for an EHSI (Electronic Horizontal
Situation Indicator) (bottom left).
Figure 8. A compensatory display (top left) only shows error relative to a reference, in this case a given
radial from a radio beacon (the aircraft is to the right of the radial and should steer left to follow it). The
display on the bottom left shows an EHSI; the dashed line emanating from the “ownship” symbol shows the
predicted turning radius of the aircraft as it is following an alternative course, shown by the magenta line,
and offering a preview to the pilots. The display on the bottom right shows a “tunnel in the sky” where pilots
are offered cues where they should fly as well as preview where the aircraft will go given the present control
inputs.
3.7 Performance Measurement
Performance in tracking tasks is commonly measured in terms of error, or the difference of the desired and
actual paths or system states. Position error error refers to frequent deviations around the desired state or
path. Velocity error represents tracking “out of phase” (see Figure 9 for illustrations).
Note that if we simply averaged the error in the examples in Figure 9, it would be close to zero. How-
ever, tracking performance in these examples was far from perfect. To accurately represent error in tracking,
we must eliminate the signs. This is commonly done by calculating the Root Mean Square Error (RMSE),
given by the following formula:
7
RM SE =
s Pi
n=1(Xi − ¯X)2
n
Figure 9. Measurement of error (performance) in tracking tasks.
4 Human Operator Limitations
Processing delay from perception of error to decision on a corrective action to execution of the correction
(cf. the model of human information processing) is an inherent limiting factor in tracking performance.
First order systems may be successfully tracked with 150-300 ms time delays. Second order systems exhibit
400-500 ms delays, reflecting complexity of decision-making.
The limit of information transmission in tracking is about 4–10 bits/s. The limit on frequency at which
corrective decisions can be made, that is, max. bandwidth of random inputs, is therefore about 0.5–1.0 Hz.
Performance may be improved beyond these limitations by having a good mental model of system dy-
namics, which allows for accurate anticipation and even open-loop control, and compatibility of control and
display relationship in tracking (S-R compatibility). Conversely, incompatible compensatory displays, e.g.,
left-moving error cursor requires right-moving response, or the tracking motion is not aligned with display
motion, hurt performance.
