A B S T R A C T
Some concepts are more essential for human communication than others. In this paper, we investigate whether
the concept of agent-backgrounding is sufficiently important for communication that linguistic structures for
encoding this concept are present in young sign languages. Agent-backgrounding constructions serve to reduce
the prominence of the agent – the English passive sentence a book was knocked over is an example. Although these
constructions are widely attested cross-linguistically, there is little prior research on the emergence of such
devices in new languages. Here we studied how agent-backgrounding constructions emerge in Nicaraguan Sign
Language (NSL) and adult homesign systems. We found that NSL signers have innovated both lexical and
morphological devices for expressing agent-backgrounding, indicating that conveying a flexible perspective on
events has deep communicative value. At the same time, agent-backgrounding devices did not emerge at the
same time as agentive devices. This result suggests that agent-backgrounding does not have the same core
cognitive status as agency. The emergence of agent-backgrounding morphology appears to depend on receiving a
linguistic system as input in which linguistic devices for expressing agency are already well-established.
1. Introduction
We can conceptualize a far greater range of thoughts than we have
words or syntactic structures to express. When a linguistic structure
does encode a concept, this provides insight into the importance of the
concept: that it is relevant given a particular social or ecological en-
vironment, cognitively prominent, or useful in facilitating commu-
nication (see Gibson et al., 2017; Levinson & Majid, 2014; Majid et al.,
2018; Regier, Carstensen, & Kemp, 2016 for review). Understanding
which concepts have high priority for linguistic encoding across lan-
guages and cultures is a central goal of cognitive science. A related goal
is understanding how semantic structures (i.e., form/meaning map-
pings) relate to each other within a language: whether linguistic en-
coding of a particular concept depends on a related concept also having
linguistic encoding. For example, dual number marking is only found in
languages that also have plural number marking (see Greenberg, 1963,
Universal 34).
In this paper, we address these issues by studying the emergence of
semantic structures in the community sign language Nicaraguan Sign
Language (NSL) and in the gestural systems of individual adult home-
signers, deaf individuals who have learned neither a signed nor a
spoken language, but who nevertheless communicate via their own
gesture systems, called “homesigns” (Coppola & Newport, 2005;
Feldman, Goldin-Meadow, & Gleitman, 1978; Goldin-Meadow, 2003).
Studying young sign languages allows us to observe which semantic
structures emerge most readily in language, indicating that these con-
cepts have high priority for linguistic encoding. For semantic structures
that take longer to emerge, we can also observe in young sign languages
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cognition.2020.104332
Received 3 July 2019; Received in revised form 11 May 2020; Accepted 18 May 2020
⁎ Corresponding author at: Department of Psychology, University of Wisconsin – Madison, United States of America.
E-mail addresses: lrissman@wisc.edu (L. Rissman), laurahorton@utexas.edu (L. Horton), mflaher1@swarthmore.edu (M. Flaherty),
asenghas@barnard.edu (A. Senghas), marie.coppola@uconn.edu (M. Coppola), dbrentari@uchicago.edu (D. Brentari), sgm@uchicago.edu (S. Goldin-Meadow).
Cognition 203 (2020) 104332
Available online 16 June 2020
0010-0277/ © 2020 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.
T
the conditions that are necessary for the emergence of these structures
(see Goldin-Meadow, 2010; Goldin-Meadow, Brentari, Coppola,
Horton, & Senghas, 2015; Sandler, 2017).
The populations of signers that we studied constitute three stages of
language emergence. First, homesigners create their homesigns in the
absence of a linguistic community and without having received a lan-
guage model as input. NSL signers constitute the second and third
stages of emergence. In the late 1970s-early 1980s in Managua, a school
for special education opened and served many deaf students who
otherwise had not been exposed to a conventional sign language (Kegl
& Iwata, 1989; Pölich, 2005; Senghas, 1995; Senghas, Senghas, & Pyers,
2005). The school was conducted in Spanish, which was inaccessible to
the deaf students. Nevertheless, time at school gave students the op-
portunity to interact with other deaf individuals, and a new sign lan-
guage, NSL, was born. Studies of NSL distinguish different “cohorts” of
signers. The first cohort of NSL constitutes the group of previously
homesigning children who began signing with other deaf peers for the
first time when they entered the school. These individuals are part of a
linguistic community but have not received a language model as input.
Subsequent cohorts are delineated in roughly 10-year intervals, with
each cohort entering the school as children and learning NSL from the
previous cohort (Senghas, 2003; Senghas & Coppola, 2001). These
subsequent cohorts have both a linguistic community and have received
a language model from previous cohorts.
We ask whether signers at these different stages of emergence have
innovated linguistic structures for expressing agent-backgrounding. An
“agent” is often understood to be an animate individual who causes an
event to occur. In an event of a waiter folding a napkin, for example, the
waiter is an agent. The napkin is often described as filling the “patient”
role. Language users have a range of available linguistic options to
describe the multiple facets of events. Suppose a waiter reports to a
restaurant manager all the napkins have been folded. The waiter is using
passive voice, conveying the importance of the napkins while placing
little emphasis on who specifically folded them. Passive voice is a type
of agent-backgrounding construction. Agent-backgrounding is the con-
ceptual representation wherein an agentive event is construed from the
perspective of the patient rather than the agent.
Passive voice has received considerable attention in theories of
syntax (Abraham & Leisiö, 2006; Baker, 1988; Kiparsky, 2013;
Shibatani, 1985; Siewierska, 1984), and numerous studies have ad-
dressed how children acquire passive voice (Armon-Lotem et al., 2016;
Demuth, 1990; Fox & Grodzinsky, 1998; Maratsos, Fox, Becker, &
Chalkley, 1985; Messenger & Fisher, 2018). Cross-linguistically, there
are a range of agent-backgrounding constructions beyond passive voice
(Barberà & Hofherr, 2018; Siewierska, 2013). Nonetheless, few studies
have investigated the typological prevalence of agent-backgrounding
constructions or the emergence of agent-backgrounding constructions
in new languages.
We compare the emergence of agent-backgrounding constructions
in NSL and homesign against the emergence of agentive constructions
in these sign systems. There is extensive evidence that humans have a
core system representing agency (Carey, 2009). Almost without ex-
ception, languages mark a distinction between agents and patients
morphosyntactically (Rissman & Majid, 2019). Infants as young as six
months represent agentive individuals in events as having goals and
causal efficacy (see Carey, 2009 for review). Linguistic structures for
encoding agency have also been found to emerge early in young sign
languages, including homesign (Coppola & Newport, 2005; Ergin &
Brentari, 2017; Ergin, Meir, Aran, Padden, & Jackendoff, 2018;
Flaherty, 2014; Goldin-Meadow et al., 2015; Horton, Goldin-Meadow,
Coppola, Senghas, & Brentari, 2015; Horton, Rissman, Goldin-Meadow,
& Brentari, 2017; Rissman & Goldin-Meadow, 2017; Sandler, Meir,
Padden, & Aronoff, 2005). If a homesigner is shown to innovate lin-
guistic devices for encoding a particular concept, this is evidence that
the concept has a core cognitive status. For example, Gleitman,
Senghas, Flaherty, Coppola, and Goldin-Meadow (2019) argued that
homesigners' ability to linguistically distinguish symmetrical and re-
ciprocal construals of events suggests a “common core of conceptual
distinctions” and that “unlearned conceptual forces are at work in the
creation of universally shared language structure” (6).
Whether agent-backgrounding has the same high priority for lin-
guistic encoding as agency is far from clear. On the one hand, agent-
backgrounding is conceptually dependent on agency: one cannot re-
present the former without representing the latter. Agent-back-
grounding also involves flexibility of event representation, which is
intuitively less fundamental than representing the mere presence of an
agent. Indeed, some prescriptivist grammarians have discouraged the
use of English passive voice altogether (see Ferreira, 2020 for review).
It may be that agent-backgrounding constructions only emerge after
many generations of transmission or never emerge in a particular lan-
guage. On the other hand, it is logically possible that agent-back-
grounding constructions emerge at the same time as agentive con-
structions. Gleitman et al. (2019) found that even homesigners
distinguish symmetrical and reciprocal construals of events, a distinc-
tion which also involves flexibility of event representation.
We address three questions in this study. First, is agent-back-
grounding communicatively important enough to arise in an emerging
language? Second, if it is, does agent-backgrounding arise at the same
moment as agency? Finally, at what point in the emergence of a lan-
guage does agent-backgrounding arise – in the earliest stage when the
language is used only with hearing individuals and thus is produced but
not seen (i.e., in homesign), or when the language is shared among
homesigners brought together for the first time (i.e., the first cohort of
NSL), or only when the language is transmitted to a new set of learners
(i.e., the second cohort of NSL and beyond)? Evidence from language
emergence allows us to draw conclusions about the mapping from
concepts to language beyond the particular signers studied here. First, if
we observe agent-backgrounding constructions in early stages of lan-
guage emergence, this finding would indicate that expressing agent-
backgrounding is important in human communication. Unlike typical
language learning where semantic structures are there to be learned, in
language emergence, semantic structures must be created. Second, by
studying these early sign systems, we can identify the conditions that
are necessary for the emergence of agent-backgrounding constructions,
suggesting more general dynamics of language creation and change.
1.1. Agency: typology and emergence
Like most human concepts, agent resists definition in terms of ne-
cessary and sufficient conditions (Dowty, 1991; Grimm, 2011; Levin &
Rappaport-Hovav, 2005; van Valin & Wilkins, 1996). Following Dowty
(1991) and others, we adopt the perspective that agent is a cluster
concept, and that the prototypical agent is animate, acts intentionally,
and plays a direct causal role in acting on an object. Linguistic devices
for encoding the presence of an agent are widespread cross-linguisti-
cally. In English, for example, this function is achieved syntactically
(e.g., the contrast between the girl broke the balloon and the balloon
broke), as well as lexically (e.g., push requires an agent but fall is in-
compatible with one). Morphological marking of agency is also
common across languages. The Russian example in (1) demonstrates
case marking, where the agent receives nominative case and the patient
accusative case (Comrie, 1989, Chp. 3, ex. 69):(1) Tanja ubila Mašu.
Tanya-NOM kill-PST Masha-ACC
‘Tanya killed Masha’
The tendency to morphosyntactically distinguish agents from pa-
tients is a near typological universal (see Rissman & Majid, 2019 for
review). For example, Hartmann, Haspelmath, and Cysouw (2014)
L. Rissman, et al. Cognition 203 (2020) 104332
2
studied 25 genetically diverse languages using multidimensional
scaling and found that agentive roles clustered distinctly from patient
roles. For the remainder of this paper, we understand an “agent” to be a
prototypical agent: sentient, volitional and a causer.
Turning to the typology of agent-marking in sign languages, one
common way of expressing agency is through handshape morphology
in classifier predicates, sometimes called “spatial verbs” (Emmorey,
2003; Supalla, 1986). Fig. 1 shows an NSL signer producing classifier
predicates with two different types of handshape morphemes. 1 In the
left-hand panel, the signer is describing someone tipping over a book
and is producing a predicate with handling handshape: the shape of the
hand iconically represents how someone would hold a book. In the
right-hand panel, the signer is describing the same event, but is pro-
ducing a predicate with object handshape: the shape of the hand re-
presents the shape of the book itself.
Example (2) shows an utterance from American Sign Language
(ASL) in which the predicate MOVE uses a handling handshape, and the
interpretation of the utterance is agentive, even though no sign is
produced labeling the agent (Benedicto & Brentari, 2004, p. 752, ex.
12a; in their notation, the subscript ‘hdlg’ denotes handling hand-
shape).(2) [ø]_ BOOK C + MOVE
pron:3sg book obj grab hdlg + move vert. > hor.
‘S/he took the (standing) book and laid it down on its side’
Conversely, example (3) shows an ASL utterance where the MOVE
predicate has object handshape (the subscript ‘w/e,’ or ‘whole entity’)
and the interpretation is that the event does not have an agent
(Benedicto & Brentari, 2004, p. 752, ex. 12b):(3) BOOK B + MOVE
book 2D flat objw/e + move vert. > hor.
‘The (standing) book fell down on its side’
This pair of mappings, in which handling handshape is associated
with the agent and object handshape with the patient, has been docu-
mented for a variety of established sign languages, including ASL
(Benedicto & Brentari, 2004; Goldin-Meadow et al., 2015; Kegl, 1990),
Catalan Sign Language (Benedicto, Cvejanov, & Quer, 2007),
Argentinian Sign Language (Benedicto et al., 2007); Sign Language of
the Netherlands (de Lint, 2018; Zwitserlood, 2003); Italian Sign Lan-
guage (Brentari, DiRenzo, Keane, & Volterra, 2015; Mazzoni, 2008),
British Sign Language (Brentari, DiRenzo, Keane, & Volterra, 2015),
Russian Sign Language (Kimmelman et al., 2019; Kimmelman, Pfau, &
Aboh, 2019), German Sign Language (Kimmelman, de Lint, et al., 2019)
and Hong Kong Sign Language (Brentari et al., 2015).
Linguistic typology provides one source of evidence about cross-
cultural pressures to encode concepts in language. As described earlier,
evidence from language emergence plays a complementary role. The
majority of new languages that we are able to observe today are sign
languages. Within emerging sign language communities, hearing loss
typically prevents deaf individuals from having access to the spoken
language(s) around them, particularly if they do not attend school
(Coppola, in press). Moreover, the vast majority of deaf people are born
into hearing families and do not have access to a sign language at home.
Some deaf individuals never receive exposure to a natural sign lan-
guage. Despite their lack of input from a language model, these in-
dividuals communicate with the hearing individuals in their worlds and
use gesture to do so. These gestures, called “homesign systems,” have
been shown to have many, although not all, of the properties of natural
language (Goldin-Meadow, 2003), including stable mappings between
forms and meanings. Homesigners have been shown to encode a noun/
verb distinction (Abner et al., 2019; Goldin-Meadow, Butcher,
Mylander, & Dodge, 1994; Hunsicker & Goldin-Meadow, 2013), pro-
position-level negation (Franklin, Giannakidou, & Goldin-Meadow,
2011), motion event categories (Zheng & Goldin-Meadow, 2002), the
grammatical relation of subject (Coppola & Newport, 2005), a singular/
plural distinction (Coppola, Spaepen, & Goldin-Meadow, 2013) and
causation (Rissman & Goldin-Meadow, 2017). Homesign thus re-
presents an early stage of language emergence (Coppola & Senghas,
2010). Homesign provides both evidence about what meanings are
conveyed in early communication systems (e.g., a singular vs. plural
distinction) and how these systems are structured in terms of their
phonology, morphology and syntax (e.g., a grammatical subject rela-
tion).
As with homesign, NSL provides evidence about which concepts
have high priority for linguistic encoding. As described earlier, the first
cohort of NSL were previously homesigning children who joined a
linguistic community in the context of their school. Subsequent cohorts
of NSL learned the structures that the previous cohort had created and
also introduced their own innovations. Interestingly, a variety of form/
meaning mappings are present only among subsequent cohorts of NSL
(i.e., the learners): some mental state verbs (Pyers & Senghas, 2009), a
consistent marker of left-right spatial relations (Pyers, Shusterman,
Fig. 1. NSL signer describing an event of someone tipping over a book. The predicate that encodes the motion of the event has either handling handshape (left panel)
or object handshape (right panel).
1 We use the label “morpheme” to refer to a formal component of a sign that
corresponds to a specific meaning.
L. Rissman, et al. Cognition 203 (2020) 104332
3
Senghas, Spelke, & Emmorey, 2010), and ordinal numbers used to
convey the temporal sequence of an event (Kocab, Senghas, & Snedeker,
2016). Spatial modulations are also more frequent among later cohorts
(Senghas & Coppola, 2001). By comparing older generations of signers
to younger generations, we can observe which semantic structures take
longer to emerge and what conditions support the emergence of these
structures.
Signers of emerging sign languages have been shown to use hand-
shape morphology to encode agency. The association between handling
handshape and agency has been observed among child homesigners
(Coppola & Brentari, 2014; Horton, 2018; Horton et al., 2017; Rissman
& Goldin-Meadow, 2017), adult homesigners (Goldin-Meadow et al.,
2015), first and second cohort signers of NSL (Goldin-Meadow et al.,
2015), and first, second and third cohort signers of Central Taurus Sign
Language (Ergin & Brentari, 2017). The observation that morphosyntax
for encoding agency emerges early in new languages, taken together
with the fact that agent-marking is typologically prevalent, provides
strong evidence that encoding agency has high priority in linguistic
systems.
1.2. Agent-backgrounding: typology, emergence and evolution
We ask in this paper whether agent-backgrounding has the same
high priority for encoding in linguistic systems as agency. Describing
the actions of agents is no doubt useful in communication. Agent-
backgrounding constructions, for their part, allow language users to
comment that an agentive event has happened, while remaining vague
about the precise cause (e.g., when a shipping company informs you
that your package has been misplaced). Across languages, there is a strong
tendency for both events and sentences to have an agent-oriented
construal by default (see Prat-Sala & Branigan, 2000; Riesberg,
Malcher, & Himmelmann, 2019 for review). For example, in descrip-
tions of agentive events, the agent is more likely than the patient to be
mentioned in subject position in English (Gleitman, January, Nappa, &
Trueswell, 2007; Prat-Sala & Branigan, 2000), Dutch (Vogels, Krahmer,
& Maes, 2013) and German (van Nice & Dietrich, 2003). 2 However,
viewing an agentive event from the perspective of the patient is also
possible, as reflected in the passive sentence your package has been
misplaced, where the patient “package” occupies subject position. We
use the phrase “agent-backgrounding construction” to refer to any
linguistic structure that orients an event of an agent acting on a patient
away from the agent.
Across languages, agent-backgrounding is expressed in a diverse
range of syntactic forms. Passive morphosyntax is by far the best-stu-
died agent-backgrounding construction and is common cross-linguisti-
cally. Nonetheless, passive morphosyntax is much more circumscribed
than agent-marking: of 373 languages sampled on the World Atlas of
Linguistic Structures (WALS), only 44% feature a passive construction
(Siewierska, 2013). Passives, however, are typically defined using
syntactic criteria (Haspelmath, 1990; Kulikov, 2011; Siewierska, 2013)
and, across languages, there are many types of agent-backgrounding
constructions that achieve the backgrounding function but do not fit the
syntactic criteria of a passive (Givón, 2009; Shibatani, 2006;
Siewierska, 2013). These devices include middles, impersonals, serial
verb constructions, and even simple agent omission, as in Awtuw
(Feldman, 1986). The Mandarin example in (4) demonstrates use of a
serial verb construction to convey agent-backgrounding. The verb bei
‘suffer,’ was originally used in a passive construction to describe an
adverse event, such as someone being fired, but is increasingly being
used as a more generic passive for events that are not adverse (Givón,
2009, p. 47, ex. 3b; Li & Thompson, 1981):(4) sheng-cheng bei jiefang-le
province-capital suffer liberate.PF
‘the provincial capital was liberated’
(lit.: ‘the provincial capital suffered (when someone) liberated it’)
In established sign languages, a range of linguistic devices express
agent-backgrounding, including agent omission, role shift, use of a non-
neutral or semantically empty spatial locus, topic verb constructions,
and averted eyegaze (Barberà & Hofherr, 2017, 2018; Guitteny, 2006;
Janzen, O'Dea, & Shaffer, 2001; Kegl, 1990; Rankin, 2013; Saeed &
Leeson, 1999; Sze, 2010). Argument-drop is attested in sign languages
(Bahan, Kegl, Lee, MacLaughlin, & Neidle, 2000; Lillo-Martin, 1986),
and omitting the agent argument is another way of deemphasizing the
agent. As in spoken languages, impersonal constructions are well-at-
tested in sign languages (see Barberà & Hofherr, 2018 and other articles
in the same issue). In Hong Kong Sign Language, for example, the non-
specific indefinite determiner ONEDET-PATH and the Chinese character
sign HUMAN/PERSON have a non-referential function and serve to
background the agent (Sze & Tang, 2018). Thus across languages,
agent-backgrounding constructions range from the relatively complex
syntactically (e.g., passive voice) to the relatively simple (e.g., agent
omission).
The cross-linguistic literature provides a wealth of evidence about
how different languages convey agent-backgrounding. This literature
does not, however, provide a straightforward answer to the question of
whether agent-backgrounding has high priority for encoding in lan-
guage. We are not aware of any quantitative assessment of what per-
centage of the world's languages contains agent-backgrounding con-
structions, nor are we aware of any language that has been claimed to
not have an agent-backgrounding construction. Given the current lit-
erature, it may therefore be true that agent-backgrounding construc-
tions are just as common as agentive constructions. At the same time,
the current evidence is also compatible with the alternative, that
marking agent-backgrounding is less common than marking agency.
The studies cited in Section 1.1 on agent-marking in young sign
languages provide a hint that these languages might use handshape
morphology to encode agent-backgrounding. In these studies, handling
handshapes are used exclusively in agentive contexts, whereas object
handshapes are used in both agentive and non-agentive contexts
(Brentari et al., 2015; Goldin-Meadow et al., 2015). One reason for this
pattern might be that these studies used a set of stimuli in which the
agent is visually backgrounded: only an arm or hand manipulating an
object, rather than the whole agent's body being visible. If object
handshapes for this set of stimuli were serving an agent-backgrounding
function, this finding would indicate that agent-backgrounding has high
priority for linguistic encoding.
Alternatively, a reconstructed model of language evolution based on
historical change in languages suggests that agent-backgrounding has
lower priority for linguistic encoding than agency. Grammaticalization
theorists propose general principles and pathways by which words take
on new meanings and morphosyntactic behavior over time (Bybee,
Perkins, & Pagliuca, 1994; Heine, Claudi, & Hünnemeyer, 1991; Heine
& Kuteva, 2002; Janzen, 2012; Narrog & Heine, 2011; Pfau &
Steinbach, 2011). Drawing on grammaticalization pathways for over
500 languages, Heine and Kuteva (2007) propose a reconstruction of
how language evolved. In this model, nouns emerged first, then verbs,
then adjectives and adverbs, then a range of other grammatical cate-
gories (see also Hurford, 2012). Crucially, case markers (which mark
agents, among other roles) evolved before passive markers (a type of
agent-backgrounding construction). Although a range of other mor-
phosyntactic elements convey each of these meanings, this pattern of
grammaticalization across languages raises the possibility that marking
agency was evolutionarily prior to marking agent-backgrounding.2 Agents have been argued to be more conceptually accessible than patients
(Bock & Warren, 1985; van Nice & Dietrich, 2003).
L. Rissman, et al. Cognition 203 (2020) 104332
4
1.3. Research approach
We compare the emergence of agentive constructions against the
emergence of agent-backgrounding constructions for two groups of
signers: adult signers of NSL and adult homesigners from Nicaragua. We
elicited descriptions of short video clips from these groups of signers. To
assess how signers encode the presence of an agent, we contrasted de-
scriptions of events where a person is seen acting on an object (e.g., a
woman tipping over a book onto a table) against events where an object
undergoes a change on its own and no person is present (e.g., a book
falling over onto a table). The agents in our videos all have the prop-
erties of a prototypical agent, as defined in Section 1.1. In addition, the
patients in our videos are all inanimate objects that undergo change of
location/configuration.
To assess signers' use of agent-backgrounding constructions, we used
a perceptual manipulation: whether the face/torso of an animate agent
was visible or not. A variety of factors influence whether an agentive
event is viewed from an agent-oriented vs. patient-oriented perspective,
including conceptual factors such as animacy, discourse and lexical
factors, and perceptual factors such as the relative size of the event
participants (see Bock & Ferreira, 2014; Prat-Sala & Branigan, 2000;
Rissman, Woodward, & Goldin-Meadow, 2019 for review). Rissman
et al. (2019) found that when English speakers describe events of an
animate agent acting on an inanimate patient and they can see the face
and torso of the agent, they almost always produce active descriptions,
such as a woman tipped over a book. By contrast, when only the hand and
forearm of the agent are visible on screen, English speakers are more
likely to produce passive descriptions such as a book was tipped over.
Rissman et al. (2019) argue that when the face/torso are occluded, the
agent has lower conceptual accessibility and the event as a whole has a
more agent-backgrounded construal. Another possibility is that English
speakers produce more passive descriptions because they have in-
sufficient information about whether the agent is a man or a woman.
Studies on the discourse functions of passive have shown that the
passive may be elicited in contexts where the exact identity of the agent
is either unknown or unimportant (Jespersen, 1992 [1924]; Stein,
1979; Thompson, 1987). Obscuring the gender of the agent may thus
promote agent-backgrounding language.
In the present study, signers described events where a person was
seen manipulating an object. In Body-Agent events, the person's hands,
face, and torso were visible during the vignette. In Hand-Agent events,
only the person's hand and forearm were visible during the vignette and
the manipulated object was larger in scale relative to the Body-Agent
events. If signers describe the agent and patient in different ways across
these two types of events (Body-Agent events vs. Hand-Agent events),
we would have evidence for the emergence of agent-backgrounding
language. We expect that signers will recognize the Hand-Agent events
as agentive, as even 9-month-old infants interpret a hand as being
connected to an agent (Saxe, Tzelnic, & Carey, 2007; Slaughter &
Heron-Delaney, 2010; see also Wolff, 2003). In addition to these two
types of agentive events, signers also described No Agent events. In
these events, an object underwent a change seemingly on its own, such
as a book falling over from an upright position. If signers distinguish No
Agent events from Body-Agent events, we have evidence that signers
linguistically encode the presence of an agent. No Agent events were
matched with the agentive events in terms of the patient's change of
state. For example, in one set of Body-Agent and Hand-Agent events, a
person tips over a book, and in the corresponding No Agent event, the
book falls over.
We analyzed two types of linguistic devices: (1) a lexical/pronom-
inal device – production of agent nominals and (2) a morphological
device – distribution of handshape in classifier predicates.3 As noted
earlier, omitting a lexical label for the agent has been demonstrated to
be a feature of agent-backgrounding constructions in established signed
languages (American Sign Language: Kegl, 1990; Janzen et al., 2001;
Catalan Sign Language: Barberà & Hofherr, 2017). In prominent the-
ories of language evolution, words (i.e., consistent mappings between a
label and a referent) emerged before syntactic and morphological
structures (Givón, 2009; Heine & Kuteva, 2007; Hurford, 2012). As a
lexical strategy, agent omission may emerge early as a means of con-
veying agent-backgrounding.
To explore the second device, distribution of handshape in classifier
predicates, we analyzed whether signers use handshape morphology in
different ways across Body-Agent, Hand-Agent and No Agent events. As
described in Section 1.1, an association between handling handshape
and agency has been documented for multiple sign languages. Goldin-
Meadow et al. (2015) found, however, that when adult homesigners
and NSL signers described agentive events, they not only produced
handling handshape predicates but they also produced a sizable pro-
portion of object handshape predicates. One explanation for this finding
is that signers used object handshape to emphasize the change of state
of the patient, even for an agentive event. For example, in an event in
which someone puts a pen down onto a table, producing a predicate
with object handshape (i.e., an extended index finger) highlights the
pen's change of location. Signers may therefore use a combination of
handling and object handshape predicates productively to emphasize or
deemphasize the agent as suggested by the context.
In addition to Body-Agent, Hand-Agent and No Agent videos, we
included a fourth condition, an Event Control video. If linguistic devices
for expressing agent-backgrounding have not yet emerged for a parti-
cular group of signers, then we expect that these signers will not use
handshape to distinguish Body-Agent from Hand-Agent events, which
would be a null effect (i.e., Body-Agent descriptions do not differ from
Hand-Agent descriptions). However, a null effect might have little to do
with agent-backgrounding, and might instead reflect general con-
straints on signers' descriptions, such as a dispreference for producing
multiple predicates or a dispreference for producing both handling and
object handshape predicates in a single trial. To control for these fac-
tors, we asked signers to describe agentive events that are strongly
patient-oriented and we presented them in a Hand-Agent frame, thus
further downplaying the agent. In these Event Control videos, the hand
of an agent moves the patient into an unusual configuration, e.g., tip-
ping a book onto its spine and then open. The complexity and oddity of
the change undergone by the patient in these events makes the patient
more conceptually prominent than the patient in the Hand-Agent
events. We expected all signers to use handshape to emphasize the
patient in these events. Note that Hand-Agent and Body-Agent videos
display the same event from different perspectives. Event Control vi-
deos provide an index of whether a signer can emphasize the patient in
an agentive event but, because they do not portray the event shown in
the Hand-Agent and Body-Agent conditions, they do not test agent-
backgrounding per se.
Turning to the signers themselves, we contrast three levels of lan-
guage emergence, with adult homesigners constituting the first level –
these individuals have each used their homesign system as a primary
mode of communication for their entire lives with close hearing friends
and family. Importantly, and in contrast to all signers of NSL, home-
signers do not share their homesign system in the context of a linguistic
community. Signers from the first cohort of NSL constitute the second
level: these individuals share a sign system with deaf peers, but they
had the task of reconciling multiple idiosyncratic homesign systems
when this community was formed. Signers from the second and third
3 As reviewed in Section 1.2, a variety of agent-backgrounding devices have
been attested in sign languages (e.g., eye gaze, role shift). We analyzed agent
(footnote continued)
nominals and classifier handshape because these devices have been docu-
mented as being used by NSL signers to encode agency (Coppola & Senghas,
2010; Goldin-Meadow et al., 2015).
L. Rissman, et al. Cognition 203 (2020) 104332
5
cohorts of NSL constitute the third level: these individuals are members
of a signing community and also received a signed model from the
previous generation of NSL. We report the results from the NSL signers
in Experiment 1 and the homesigners in Experiment 2. In Experiment 3,
we report how English speakers describe these stimuli when they can
use only their hands to do so – this study explores how limitations on
communicative modality constrain the range of concepts that language
users can express.
2. Experiment 1: NSL
2.1. Participants
We tested 18 signers in total. Eight participants were from the first
cohort of NSL (NSL 1; F = 3; age: mean = 42 years,
range = 37–48 years). These signers all entered school before age seven
(mean = 4.4, range = 2.1–6.2 years). We also tested 10 participants
from the second and third cohorts of NSL (NSL 2 & 3; F = 5; age:
mean = 28, range = 21–33), who all entered school before age five
(mean = 3.5, range = 2.1–4.7 years). Of these 10 signers, six were
from the second cohort and four were from the third cohort. Since our
question was whether exposure to a language model influences emer-
gence of agent-backgrounding devices, we collapse the data from the
second and third cohort signers in our analyses.
2.2. Design and materials
Participants described four types of videos: (1) In Body-Agent vi-
deos, a person acted on an object (e.g., a woman tipped over a book),
and the person's face, torso and hands were visible throughout the
video. (2) In Hand-Agent videos, a person's hand entered the video
frame from off screen, performed the same action as in the Body-Agent
videos (e.g., tipping over a book), and then exited the frame. (3) In No
Agent videos, the object moved on its own (e.g., a book fell over), with
no person visible in the video. (4) In Event Control videos, a person's
hand entered the frame from off screen but performed an unusual ac-
tion on the object (e.g., opening the book while tipping it forward on its
spine). In the Body-Agent videos, the patient is smaller relative to the
video frame than the patient in the other three conditions. As discussed
in Section 1.3, relative size of event participants is one influence on the
use of agent-backgrounding constructions. The absence of the face/
torso is another influence: Rissman et al. (2019) found that even when
the size of the patient is held constant, occluding the body of the agent
leads English-speakers to produce more passive descriptions. We con-
structed stimuli that differ on both of these dimensions to increase the
likelihood that NSL signers would produce agent-backgrounding con-
structions. Fig. 2 shows still images from each of these four conditions.
Previous work on emergence of agentive devices in sign languages used
stimuli with only the hand/arm visible, and with the objects the same
size in all of the vignettes (Coppola & Brentari, 2014; Brentari, DiRenzo,
et al., 2015; Goldin-Meadow et al., 2015).
Experiment 1 had a blocked within-subjects design in which parti-
cipants viewed Hand-Agent videos, then Event Control videos, then
Body-Agent videos, then No Agent videos. We chose this blocking to
maximize the chance that participants would produce agent-back-
grounding constructions. We reasoned that if participants saw Body-
Agent videos first, they would receive information about the person-
hood of the agents (e.g., male, balding), which could prime them to
produce more agentive language in the Hand-Agent and Event Control
conditions. Prior to the Hand-Agent block, participants saw a block
containing static images of the opening frame of the Hand-Agent vi-
deos. No people were present in these static images. The purpose of this
block was to familiarize participants with the objects in the videos and
to identify which labels participants used to describe the objects. The
descriptions of these static images are not reported in the analysis.
There were five different types of items (featuring three different
agents) across the four video conditions: (1) a woman tipping over a
book/a book falling/a woman opening a book while pushing it onto its
spine, (2) a man spinning a tire on a string/a tire spinning on a string/a
man lifting a tire on a string onto a hook, (3) a woman opening a
dresser door/a dresser door swinging open/a woman pushing a dresser
onto its side, (4) a woman pushing a tube down into water/a tube
sinking in water/a woman pushing down and rotating a tube in water,
and (5) a man pushing a marker down a ramp/a marker rolling down a
ramp/a man pushing a marker down a ramp and standing it on its side.
Fig. 2. Still images from videos in each of the four experimental conditions. The
black box demarcates the three main conditions of interest. The Event Control
condition, which displays a conceptually prominent patient in a Hand-Agent
frame (which also highlights the patient), was included to ensure that partici-
pants have devices that focus on the patient.
L. Rissman, et al. Cognition 203 (2020) 104332
6
Several participants reported that they did not understand what was
happening in the events where someone pushed a tube down into
water. Given this ambiguity, we excluded all of the tube events from the
analysis.
In addition to the test items, each participant also described 18 filler
videos. In half of the fillers, a person was performing a repeated ac-
tivity, such as jumping or spinning in place (Activity fillers); in the
other half, an inanimate object was undergoing an action with no ob-
vious start or endpoint, such as a flag waving or water running in a
faucet (Object fillers). The purpose of these fillers was to increase the
variety in the stimuli and decrease the possibility that participants
would become consciously aware of the structure of the task, which
could prime them to linguistically distinguish the conditions. These
fillers were also intended to encourage participants to produce both
person-oriented sentences (for the Activity fillers) and object-oriented
sentences (for the Object fillers). The fillers were presented randomly
throughout the five blocks of the experiment (static block +4 video
blocks). Summing across all stimuli, participants saw 43 images/videos.
All participants saw the stimuli in the same order. 4 Each video was
approximately 3–4 s long.
2.3. Procedure
Videos were displayed on a laptop computer positioned on a table to
the side of the participant. After each video played, a gray screen ap-
peared, and the participants described what they had seen to a signer of
similar age. An experimenter was seated next to the computer and
presented the next trial after the participants had completed their de-
scriptions. Participants were free to provide a description of any length
for each of the videos. Participants were filmed via a single video
camera placed directly opposite them.
2.4. Coding
Videos of the participants' descriptions were coded using the an-
notation software ELAN (Crasborn & Sloetjes, 2008). We annotated
each sign that was produced, and we present here analyses for two
categories of signs: agent nominals and event descriptions. We coded three
types of agent nominals: first, agent labels, which included the following
conventionalized NSL signs MAN, WOMAN, GLASSES and PERSON.5
Second, points to the chest, which Coppola and Senghas (2010) ana-
lyzed as a switch-reference device marking the subject. Third, the NSL
person classifier sign, in which the index and middle finger are in the
shape of an inverted V. Signs were considered event descriptions if they
iconically represented the action displayed in the vignette and if they
were produced in the signing plane which corresponded to the plane in
which the event took place (see Brentari, Coppola, Mazzoni, & Goldin-
Meadow, 2012). For reasons of convenience, we refer to event de-
scription signs as “predicates.”
Each event description predicate was coded for how the handshape
of the dominant hand represented the patient in each video (i.e., the
book, tire, dresser or marker; see Fig. 2). We coded the following
handshape categories: handling, where the hand represented how the
patient was manipulated in the video; object, where the hand re-
presented the shape either of the entire patient (e.g., a flat palm re-
presenting a book) or a subpart of the patient (e.g., a curved hand re-
presenting the edge of a tire); and place-holder, where the hand traced
the path of motion but represented none of the features of the agent/
patient (e.g., an extended index finger resembling a pointing gesture).
Since we were interested in how signers encode agency, we collapsed
the categories object and place-holder into the overarching category non-
handling in our analysis, as neither of these handshape types encodes
features of the agent. In addition to these three handshape types, we
also coded a sequential handling–non-handling category, where for a
single sign, the hand transitioned mid-stroke from a handling to a non-
handling shape; and an ambiguous category, where the handshape could
be representing either a person manipulating an object or the object
itself (e.g., two curved hands forming a circle, representing either lifting
a tire or the shape of the tire itself). The stimuli were designed to
minimize this type of ambiguity. Predicates with ambiguous handshape
were excluded from analysis. Table 1 shows the rates at which parti-
cipants produced each of these handshape types. Note that signers often
produced more than one predicate in each trial.
The data were coded by a research assistant, who met with the first
and second authors to discuss any unclear responses. To assess relia-
bility of the coding, a second research assistant who was familiar with
the coding scheme but was not part of these discussions, and was un-
familiar with our research questions, coded a random 10% of the NSL
trials. There was 100% agreement between the two coders as to whe-
ther the trial contained an agent nominal. For event descriptions, a sign
was scored as a match if the two coders agreed both as to whether the
sign was an event description and as to the handshape type of the sign.
Across all signs produced, there was a 94% agreement rate with respect
to these criteria.
2.5. Results
2.5.1. Agent omission analysis
All 18 NSL signers produced at least one agent nominal during the
experiment. Only one NSL 2 signer produced agent nominals in the No
Agent condition (the sign PERSON immediately followed by the lexical
sign NOTHING, negating the agent label). In contrast, agent nominals
were produced for all three types of agentive events. This result makes
it clear that NSL signers can and do use lexical devices to encode
agency. The bars in Fig. 3 show the average proportion of trials where
agent labels, points to chest and person classifiers were produced for
each cohort and for each of the three agentive conditions (Body-Agent,
Hand-Agent, Event Control). The circles in Fig. 3 show the average
proportion of trials where signers produced at least one agent nominal.
In Fig. 3, we see that NSL signers produced agent nominals on most,
but not all, Body-Agent trials. For both cohorts, agent labels were by far
the most common type of agent nominal. Across the four signs that we
coded as agent labels, the signs MAN and WOMAN were most common
(MAN: 62%, WOMAN: 35%, GLASSES: 2%, PERSON: 1%). We modeled
the differences across the three agentive conditions using mixed effects
logistic regression and the lme4 package for R (Bates & Maechler, 2009;
R Core Team, 2017), modeling whether or not a signer produced at
least one agent nominal per trial. Each model included random inter-
cepts for Subject and Item. Possible fixed effects were Condition (Body-
Agent vs. Hand-Agent vs. Event Control) and Cohort (NSL 1 vs. NSL 2 &
3). Models were evaluated through nested model comparison. 6 We
4 Rissman et al. (2019) found that English speakers produced more passive
descriptions for Hand-Agent events than Body-Agent events with a different set
of stimuli. To verify that the stimuli in the current study elicited a similar
contrast in the particular blocked design we used, we asked 27 English speakers
on Amazon Mechanical Turk to describe our stimuli. We observed the following
rates of passive sentences in each of the video conditions: Body-Agent: 4%,
Hand-Agent: 17%, No Agent: 1%, Event Control: 33%. These percentages are
comparable to those reported by Rissman et al. and validate that both Hand-
Agent and Event Control videos are more patient-oriented than Body-Agent
videos.
5 The agent in the Body-Agent videos that featured a dresser was wearing
glasses. We included the sign GLASSES to maintain compatibility between the
homesign and NSL analyses; however, GLASSES only appeared twice among the
106 NSL agent labels.
6 Starting with an intercept-only model, if the addition of a particular factor
significantly increases the likelihood of the model according to the log-like-
lihood ratio test, this indicates a main effect of this factor (Quené & van den
Bergh, 2008). Given two models that differ by one independent variable, the
L. Rissman, et al. Cognition 203 (2020) 104332
7
attempted to fit models including by-Subject and by-Item random
slopes but these models did not converge, perhaps due to our small
sample size.
The best-fitting model of the NSL data included the Condition fixed
effect but not the Cohort effect or the interaction between Condition
and Cohort. NSL signers were more likely to produce at least one agent
nominal in the Body-Agent condition than in the Hand-Agent condition
(β = −3.9, SE = 0.6, p < .001) or the Event Control condition
(β = −5.2, SE = 0.7, p < .001). At the individual level, seven out of
eight NSL 1 signers were more likely to produce an agent nominal in the
Body-Agent condition than in the Hand-Agent condition (the remaining
NSL 1 signer always produced agent nominals in these two conditions).
Similarly, nine out of ten NSL 2 & 3 signers were more likely to produce
an agent nominal in the Body-Agent than in the Hand-Agent condition
(the remaining signer produced agent nominals for all of these trials).
NSL 1 and NSL 2 & 3 signers thus robustly use agent omission as a
lexical strategy to encode agent-backgrounding.
To assess whether there was a trade-off between signs for the agent
and signs for the patient, we analyzed whether signers' production of
patient nominals (e.g., BOOK, MARKER) differed across conditions and
cohorts. We counted as patient nominals both conventionalized lexical
signs and classifiers referring to the patient (e.g., signs tracing the tire
hanging from the string). Rates of producing patient nominals were
high across conditions and cohorts. Averaging across cohorts, the rate
of producing at least one patient nominal per trial was 81% in the Body-
Agent condition, 97% in the Hand-Agent condition, 89% in the No
Agent condition and 81% in the Event Control condition. We analyzed
these data using mixed effects logistic regression as above, with Body-
Agent as the reference level for the Condition effect. We found a
significant main effect of Condition but no effect of Cohort or interac-
tion between Condition and Cohort. Signers were more likely to pro-
duce a patient nominal in the Hand-Agent condition than in the Body-
Agent condition (β = 2.6, SE = 1.1, p < .05). This may indicate a
trade-off between production of agent and patient nominals.
Nonetheless, it is difficult to interpret this finding as showing that NSL
signers use patient production to mark the prominence of the patient, as
there was no difference between the Body-Agent condition and either
the No Agent or Event Control conditions. Recall that the Hand-Agent
events were the first video block that signers saw. It may be that signers
almost always produced patient nominals for these videos because it
was the first time they were seeing each type of vignette.
2.5.2. Predicate handshape analysis
We next tested whether NSL signers use handshape morphology in
their event descriptions to encode agentive and agent-backgrounding
construals. Given the literature reviewed in Section 1.2, we predict that
all cohorts of NSL will use handshape to distinguish agentive events
from non-agentive events: handling handshapes for Body-Agent events,
and non-handling handshapes for No Agent events. These results would
support the core conceptual status of agency. If agent-backgrounding
has the same priority for linguistic encoding as agency, we expect to
find that agent-backgrounding constructions will be used by all groups
of signers to distinguish Body-Agent from Hand-Agent events. In addi-
tion, we expect that all groups will distinguish Body-Agent videos from
Event Control videos because of the unusual change of state in the
patient in the control videos (which makes the patient likely to be
noticed and described).
As a primary analysis, we analyzed the number of handling and non-
handling predicates that signers produced for each trial, and whether
the number varied across the four conditions. For this analysis, se-
quential handling–non-handling signs, where the sign transitions mid-
stroke from a handling to a non-handling handshape, were counted
Table 1
Mean number of predicates per trial and proportion of total predicates with each handshape type by signer group, averaged across all conditions.
Participant group N # of predicates Predicates per Trial Handshape types
Handling Non-handling Sequential handling– non-handling Ambig
Object Place-holder
NSL cohort 1 (Exp 1) 8 219 1.7 0.47 0.31 0.16 0.05 0.00
NSL cohorts 2 & 3 (Exp 1) 10 275 1.7 0.39 0.44 0.13 0.04 0.00
Homesigners (Exp 2) 4 94 1.5 0.26 0.49 0.24 0.00 0.01
Silent gesturers
(Exp 3)
12 252 1.3 0.50 0.26 0.23 0.01 0.00
Fig. 3. Proportion of trials on which NSL signers (Cohorts 1 and 2 & 3) produced each type of agent nominal across the three agentive conditions. Circles show the
proportion of trials where signers produced at least one agent nominal. Error bars show binomial 95% confidence intervals calculated using the Wilson method.
(footnote continued)
difference between the log-likelihoods of these models multiplied by −2 is
distributed as a chi-squared random variable with df = 1.
L. Rissman, et al. Cognition 203 (2020) 104332
8
twice, once as a handling predicate and once as a non-handling pre-
dicate.7 Fig. 4 presents the average number of handling and non-
handling predicates produced per trial by each cohort of NSL signers.
We analyzed the predicate frequency data using mixed effects models
and the lme4 package for R, assuming an underlying Poisson distribu-
tion (Coxe, West, & Aiken, 2009; Gardner, Mulvey, & Shaw, 1995). We
fit separate models for the handling and non-handling predicate data.
For this first analysis, we treated these two handshape types as distinct
dependent variables, as signers have the option of producing either type
of handshape, or both types. The possible fixed effects for each model
were Cohort (NSL 1 vs. NSL 2 & 3) and Condition (Body-Agent vs.
Hand-Agent vs. No Agent vs. Event Control). We chose Body-Agent as
the reference level, as this is the most unambiguously agentive condi-
tion. We included random intercepts for Subject and Item. 8 We at-
tempted to fit models including by-Subject and by-Item random slopes
but these models did not converge, perhaps due to our small sample
size.
We first modeled production of non-handling handshapes. The
Condition effect contributed significantly to the model (χ 2
(3) = 35.1,
p < .001) but the Cohort effect did not (χ 2
(1) = 1.6, p = .2). NSL
signers produced more non-handling predicates in each of the three
non-Body-Agent conditions than in the Body-Agent condition (Hand-
Agent: β = 0.47, SE = 0.21, p = .02; Event Control: β = 0.89,
SE = 0.19, p < .001; No Agent: β = 0.96, SE = 0.19, p < .001). We
did not find evidence that one cohort produced more non-handling
handshapes than the other.
Our principal question in this study was whether NSL 1 and NSL 2 &
3 signers differ in how they distinguish the Body-Agent vs. Hand-Agent
events. To test whether an interaction between Cohort and Condition
(particularly Body-Agent vs. Hand-Agent) modulated production of
non-handling handshapes, we added the interaction term (Cohort x
Condition) to the model with the Condition fixed effect. In this model,
the significant main difference between the Body-Agent and Hand-
Agent conditions disappears and a marginally significant interaction
between the Hand-Agent level and Cohort emerges (β = 0.52,
SE = 0.28, p = .06). This result suggests that NSL 2 & 3 signers are
more inclined to produce non-handling handshapes when the face of
the agent is occluded than NSL 1 signers are. NSL 2 & 3 signers may
thus be using non-handling handshapes to convey agent-back-
grounding. None of the interaction terms for the three other levels of
the Condition factor (Body-Agent, No Agent and Event Control) were
significant.
Turning to NSL signers' production of handling predicates, the
Condition effect contributed significantly to the model (χ 2
(3) = 62.5,
p < .001) but the Cohort effect did not (χ2
(1) = 2.2, p = .14). NSL
signers produced fewer handling predicates in the No Agent and Event
Control conditions than in the Body-Agent condition (No Agent:
β = −1.79, SE = 0.29, p < .001; Event Control: β = −0.39,
SE = 0.17, p = .02). Rates of handling handshape did not differ,
however, between the Body-Agent and Hand-Agent conditions. We did
not find evidence that one cohort produced more handling handshapes
than the other.
As with the analysis of non-handling handshapes, we then modeled
whether production of handling handshape in any of the four event
conditions interacted with Cohort. We added the interaction term to the
model with the Condition main effect and found that in the Event
Control condition, NSL 2 & 3 signers were less likely than NSL 1 signers
to produce handling handshapes (β = −0.54, SE = 0.27, p = .04). In
this model with the interaction term, there is no significant main dif-
ference between the Body-Agent and Event Control conditions. None of
the interaction terms for the three other levels of the Condition factor
(Body-Agent, Hand-Agent and No Agent) were significant.
These results show that NSL signers use both handling and non-
handling handshape to encode agency. For Body-Agent events, signers
used an average of 1.2 handling and 0.5 non-handling predicates per
trial. For No-Agent events, signers used 0.2 handling and 1.4 non-
handling predicates per trial on average. The cohorts were not statis-
tically different in how they used handshape to distinguish Body-Agent
vs. No Agent events.
The cohorts did differ, however, in how they used handshape to
convey agent-backgrounding. We found a marginal interaction such
that the difference in production of non-handling handshapes between
the Body-Agent and Hand-Agent conditions was greater for NSL 2 & 3
signers than for NSL 1 signers. This facility with agent-backgrounding
language among NSL 2 & 3 signers extends to Event Control videos as
well: here they primarily used non-handling handshapes, highlighting
the prominence of patient in these events. Although NSL 2 & 3 signers
produced numerically fewer handling handshapes in the Hand-Agent
condition than in the Body-Agent condition, we did not find a sig-
nificant main difference between these two conditions for handling
handshapes or a significant interaction with Cohort.
For NSL 1 signers, the numerical difference in the use of non-
handling handshapes between the Body-Agent and Hand-Agent condi-
tions was small: 0.5 vs. 0.6 non-handling handshapes per trial in each
respective condition. In a model of NSL 1 signers' production of non-
handling predicates, this difference was not statistically significant
(β = 0.17, SE = 0.34, p > .1). This null effect is not likely to reflect a
general dispreference for producing a non-handling handshape for an
agentive event, as NSL 1 signers readily did so in the Event Control
condition. These results therefore suggest that NSL 1 signers do not use
handshape in classifier predicates to convey agent-backgrounding.
In this first analysis, we computed average rates of predicate pro-
duction, treating use of handling and non-handling handshapes as
distinct dependent variables. In a second analysis, we analyze hand-
shape use across an entire trial, providing a complementary perspective
on the differences across the conditions. We classified each trial ac-
cording to which handshapes it contained: only handling-handshape
predicates; only non-handling-handshape predicates; or both handling
and non-handling-handshape predicates. This analysis provides a view
of the strategy used across an entire utterance, normalizing predicate
frequency in favor of utterance type. For this analysis, a trial with a
sequential handling–non-handling sign counted as a trial with both
handling and non-handling-handshape predicates. Note that the vast
majority of “both” trials contained two or more distinct handling and
non-handling signs. Fig. 5 presents the average proportion of trials
containing only handling, only non-handling, or both handling and
non-handling predicates produced by each cohort of signers.
Both NSL 1 signers and NSL 2 & 3 signers tended to produce trials
containing only non-handling handshapes in the No Agent condition,
and only handling handshapes in the Body-Agent condition. However,
the groups differed with respect to the Hand-Agent condition. NSL 1
signers displayed the same distribution of handshapes in the Hand-
Agent condition as in the Body-Agent condition. In contrast, NSL 2 & 3
signers showed different distributions: they produced predominantly
both handling and non-handling responses in the Hand-Agent condition,
but predominantly produced handling only responses in the Body-Agent
condition.
We evaluated these data using the Friedman rank sum test, a non-
parametric statistic used for repeated measures designs with a
7 Across all cohorts of NSL, 23 sequential handling–non-handling signs were
produced: 5 in the Body-Agent condition, 2 in the Hand-Agent condition, 4 in
the No Agent condition and 12 in the Event Control condition.
8 We included both Subject and Item random intercepts following the practice
of using the most maximal random effects structure that the data/design sup-
port (Barr, Levy, Scheepers, & Tily, 2013). Adding the Item intercept did not,
however, significantly increase the likelihood of the model. Averaging across all
conditions, NSL signers produced roughly the same number of handling and
non-handling handshape predicates for each of the four items: the mean
number of handling handshapes per trial ranged between 0.7 (book) and 0.9
(tire), whereas the mean number of non-handling handshapes ranged between
0.8 (dresser) and 1.2 (tire).
L. Rissman, et al. Cognition 203 (2020) 104332
9
multinomial outcome variable (Friedman, 1937; Siegel, 1956). We
computed ranks by representing the three levels of the outcome vari-
able as an ordinal scale from most-agentive to least-agentive (i.e.,
handling-only, both handling & non-handling, non-handling-only). We
tested the two groups of signers separately. For both NSL 1 and NSL 2 &
3 signers, ranks were different across the four conditions, indicating
main effects of condition on signers' response type (NSL 1:
χ 2
(3) = 46.8, p < .001; NSL 2 & 3: χ 2
(3) = 58.2, p < .001). For both
groups of signers, planned pairwise comparisons showed that ranks
were significantly higher in the Body-Agent condition than in the No
Agent condition (NSL 1: χ 2
(1) = 26.3, p < .001; NSL 2 & 3:
χ 2
(1) = 38.0, p < .001). Ranks were also significantly different in the
Body-Agent condition than in the Event Control condition (NSL 1:
χ 2
(1) = 5.3, p < .025; NSL 2 & 3: χ2 (1) = 18.2, p < .001). The two
groups of signers differed, however, in the comparison between Body-
Agent and Hand-Agent: For NSL 1, ranks were not significantly different
between these two conditions (χ 2
(1) = 0.5, p > .1). For NSL 2 & 3, by
contrast, the ranks were significantly higher in the Body-Agent than in
the Hand-Agent condition (χ 2
(1) = 12.1, p < .001).
We examined the robustness of the difference between Body-Agent
and Hand-Agent conditions (i.e., the robustness of the agent-back-
grounding effect) in NSL 2 & 3 signers across individuals and across
items. In terms of individuals, 8 of the 10 signers in this group produced
more trials with only handling handshapes in the Body-Agent condition
than in the Hand-Agent condition. The remaining two signers produced
more trials with only non-handling handshapes in the Hand-Agent
condition than in the Body-Agent condition. The agent-backgrounding
effect was also robust across items in NSL 2 & 3 signers, as for all four of
the items, there were more trials with only handling handshapes in the
Body-Agent condition than in the Hand-Agent condition.
2.5.3. Word order and agent nominal/handshape interaction
We next analyzed whether NSL signers favor particular word orders
for descriptions that contained both handling and non-handling pre-
dicates. As discussed in Section 1.3, serial verb constructions are one
type of syntactic structure that can serve an agent-backgrounding
function. It is possible that in NSL signers' “both” trials, the handling
and non-handling handshapes are represented as a unit. Serial verb
constructions involve multiple verbs that function as a single syntactic
unit. Across languages, they have a range of characteristics: they can
Fig. 4. Average number of non-handling and handling predicates produced per trial in each condition by each group of NSL signers. Error bars show Poisson 95%
confidence intervals.
Fig. 5. Average proportion of trials containing only handling handshapes, only non-handling handshapes, or both handling and non-handling handshapes in each
condition by each group of NSL signers. Error bars show binomial 95% confidence intervals calculated using the Wilson method.
L. Rissman, et al. Cognition 203 (2020) 104332
10
involve two or more verbs, the verbs can be adjacent or not, and the
range of possible semantic relationships between the verbs is diverse
(see Aikhenvald, 2006; Bisang, 2009; Haspelmath, 2016 for review).
We are not yet able to determine whether NSL has serial verb con-
structions, as the prosodic and constituency diagnostics that indicate
whether two verbs are part of the same clause, without any dependency
relationship between them, are not yet available for NSL. Nonetheless,
to gauge the existence of syntactic patterns in the “both” trials, we
analyzed how often handling and non-handling predicates were signed
consecutively. In the 70 “both” trials produced by NSL signers, 73%
included a 2-predicate consecutive sequence, and an additional 17%
included a 3-predicate consecutive sequence. Thus only 10% of “both”
trials featured non-consecutive predicates, a syntactic regularity com-
patible with the interpretation that handling and non-handling pre-
dicates are part of a single syntactic unit. The non-consecutive-se-
quences were distributed evenly across NSL 1 and NSL 2 & 3 signers.
The existence of a syntactic pattern in “both” trials is further supported
by the order of predicates within the consecutive sequences. For 94% of
2-predicate sequences, the word order was [handling — non-hand-
ling]. 9 This order is reminiscent of the “iconic” constituent order that
has been proposed for serial verb constructions, where the verb en-
coding causation precedes the verb encoding result (see Aikhenvald,
2006). For 3-predicate sequences, the word order pattern is less clear:
six different orders were produced, and the most frequent single word
order was [handling — non-handling — handling].10 We return to these
results in Section 5.3 when we discuss how agent-backgrounding in NSL
may continue to evolve.
We have thus far described in separate analyses how NSL signers use
agent nominals and classifier handshape to convey agent-back-
grounding. In a final analysis of the NSL data, we tested whether these
two linguistic devices interact with each other. For example, do they
play complementary roles, such that signers are more likely to produce
an agent nominal for trials with only non-handling handshapes? We
focused on the Hand-Agent condition for this analysis, as signers pro-
duced agent nominals on almost all Body-Agent trials (NSL 1: 91%; NSL
2 & 3: 85%). Table 2 is a 2 × 3 contingency table showing the number
of trials with and without agent nominals for each of these three
handshape response types (handling only, non-handling only, both
handling and non-handling). Italicized values show what is expected by
chance given the marginal distributions of agent nominal production
and handshape type, whereas the bolded values show what was actually
observed.
Using a 2 × 3 Freeman–Halton extension of the Fisher's exact
probability test (Freeman & Halton, 1951), we did not find that cell
values differed significantly from a chance distribution for either cohort
(P A = 0.79 for NSL 1; PA = 0.67 for NSL 2 & 3). These data therefore
suggest that for descriptions of Hand-Agent videos, production of agent
nominals does not interact with handshape choice. NSL signers may
instead be using these two devices as independent markers of agency/
agent-backgrounding.
2.6. Discussion
Both groups of NSL signers robustly distinguish agentive from non-
agentive events, using both lexical (nominals) and morphological
(handshapes) strategies. They produce agent nominals in agentive
events and omit them in non-agentive events; and they produce hand-
ling handshapes in agentive events and non-handling handshapes in
non-agentive events. This result supports previous findings on NSL
(e.g., Goldin-Meadow et al., 2015).
In terms of agent-backgrounding, both groups of NSL signers used the
lexical agent omission strategy to encode agent-backgrounding (i.e.,
they produced many more agent nominals in the Body-Agent condition
than in the Hand-Agent condition). However, only the second and third
cohorts used handshape morphology to encode agent-backgrounding.
The first cohort displayed the same distribution of handling and non-
handling handshapes in the Body-Agent and Hand-Agent videos: more
handling than non-handling handshapes in both Body-Agent and Hand-
Agent videos. In contrast, the second and third cohorts used different
distributions for these two conditions: more handling than non-hand-
ling handshapes in Body-Agent videos, but equal numbers (and more
trials containing both handshapes) in Hand-Agent videos. The lack of
agent-backgrounding in NSL 1 was not due to a dispreference for using
non-handling handshapes to describe patient-oriented events, as NSL 1
used predominantly non-handling handshapes to describe the Event
Control videos, which were patient-oriented.
We thus observed different types of semantic distinctions made in
the lexicon versus in morphosyntactic structure. With respect to the
lexicon, we do not observe an asymmetry in language emergence be-
tween encoding agency and encoding agent-backgrounding: signers
with a language community but without a language model (NSL 1) used
agent nominals to encode both semantic functions. We do observe an
asymmetry, however, with respect to handshape morphology: only
signers who learned from a language model (NSL 2 & 3) used handshape
to encode agent-backgrounding.
We next investigate expression of agency and agent-backgrounding
in adult homesigners. Testing these individuals will reveal whether
strategies for encoding agency and agent-backgrounding emerge even
among signers with neither a linguistic community nor a language
model. To the extent that homesign constitutes an earlier stage of
language emergence than cohort 1 NSL, we predict that homesigners
will use handshape morphology to convey agentivity (Goldin-Meadow
et al., 2015) but not use handshape morphology to convey agent-
backgrounding. This finding cannot be taken for granted, however, as
individual homesigners are able to innovate a range of linguistic
structures (Coppola, 2002; Goldin-Meadow, 2003; Horton et al., 2017)
and they display variability at the individual level (Abner et al., 2019;
Table 2
Contingency table for the Hand-Agent condition showing the distribution of
trials with or without agent nominals across the three handshape response
types. Italicized values are what is expected by chance; bolded values are ob-
served data.
Handling Non-handling Both
NSL 1
Agent nominal present 6 0 4 10
5 0 5
Agent nominal absent 12 1 9 22
13 1 8
18 1 13
NSL 2 & 3
Agent nominal present 1 2 5 8
1 1 6
Agent nominal absent 6 8 18 32
6 9 17
7 10 23
9 For this analysis, we excluded three trials in which one of the predicates in
the 2-predicate sequence involved a sequential change from one handshape to
another. These sequential predicates are difficult to interpret with respect to
word order patterns.
10 These multiple handling handshapes are morphosyntactically equivalent
but not necessarily phonologically identical.
L. Rissman, et al. Cognition 203 (2020) 104332
11
Coppola, 2002; Coppola & So, 2006; Gleitman et al., 2019). In NSL,
agent-backgrounding appears to have emerged first through a lexical
device and only later through a morphological device. If this asymmetry
indicates a broader constraint on language emergence, then we predict
that there may be homesigners who encode agent-backgrounding lexi-
cally but not morphologically, but not homesigners who show the re-
verse pattern.
3. Experiment 2: Homesign
3.1. Participants
We tested four adult Nicaraguan homesigners (F = 1; age:
mean = 34, range = 29–38). These individuals are integrated into the
social life of their local communities and families and displayed no
apparent congenital conditions, aside from being deaf. These in-
dividuals have received limited or no formal education. The home-
signers are not in contact with each other and have minimal exposure to
deaf signers of NSL (Gagne, 2015).
3.2. Design, materials, procedure and coding
The design, stimuli and testing procedure were the same as in
Experiment 1. The signs GLASSES, WOMAN, BEARD and HAIR were
coded as agent labels since these signs referred iconically to the agent
when they were produced by individual homesigners. We also con-
sidered variations of the NSL sign MAN as labels. Although none of the
homesigners had regular or extended contact with NSL signers, the two
homesigners who produced the MAN sign likely borrowed it from NSL
through occasional contact. As in Experiment 1, we also included points
to the chest as agent nominals. No homesigner produced a sign that
appeared to be functioning as a person classifier.
The coding procedure for event descriptions was the same as in
Experiment 1, as was the procedure for establishing reliability of event
description coding. One-third of the homesign trials were coded for
reliability, and we found a 93% agreement rate with respect to the
predicate matching criteria described in Section 2.4. We did not cal-
culate reliability across homesigners' agent nominals, as agent nominals
were identified on an individual basis for each homesigner.
3.3. Results
3.3.1. Agent omission analysis
We first analyzed whether use of agent nominals differed across the
four conditions. Two of the four homesigners never produced agent
nominals. The other two who did produce agent nominals produced
them systematically with respect to condition. Regarding the expression
of agency, we found that neither of these two homesigners produced an
agent nominal in the No Agent condition (nor did they produce them in
the Event Control condition). Homesigners can thus use the lexicon to
encode agency.
Turning next to agent nominals and agent-backgrounding, we found
that Homesigner 2 produced at least one agent nominal on every Body-
Agent trial, but on none of the Hand-Agent trials. Homesigner 3 showed
the same pattern, albeit attenuated: he produced at least one agent
nominal on 50% of the Body-Agent trials but on only 25% of the Hand-
Agent trials. These results show that, for homesigners who produced
agent nominals, these signs were more frequent when the face and torso
of the agent were visible (i.e., Body-Agent trials) than when only the
hand of the agent was visible (i.e., Hand-Agent trials). Thus, even at the
earliest stages of language emergence, signers can use the lexical agent-
omission strategy to convey agent-backgrounding. However, the
strategy was used categorically by only one homesigner (Homesigner
2). Neither Homesigner 1 or 4 produced any agent nominals.
For the two homesigners who produced agent nominals, we ana-
lyzed whether there was a trade-off between agent and patient nom-
inals across the four conditions. Patient nominals were coded based on
iconicity (e.g., two flat hands joined on the long axis in a V-shape was
coded as BOOK). Homesigner 2 showed uniform behavior across the
four conditions, producing patient nominals on 3 out of 4 trials.
Homesigner 3, however, produced patient nominals on only 1 Body-
Agent trial but on 3 out of 4 trials for the other three conditions. For
Homesigner 3, there may be a trade off between agent and patient
nominals.
3.3.2. Predicate handshape analysis
We next analyzed whether homesigners distinguished the four event
types (Body-Agent, Hand-Agent, No Agent and Event Control) through
handshape in their predicates. Fig. 6 shows the average number of
handling and non-handling predicates that the homesigners produced
in each of the four conditions.
We analyzed predicate production using the Friedman rank sum
test. 11 The number of handling predicates produced in each trial dif-
fered across the four conditions (χ2 (3) = 49.4, p < .001). Comparing
the Body-Agent condition to the other three conditions, signers pro-
duced more handling predicates in the Body-Agent condition than in
the No Agent condition (χ2
(1) = 5.1, p < .05). Production of handling
handshapes did not differ, however, between the Body-Agent and
Hand-Agent conditions (χ2 (1) = 0.06, p > .10) or between the Body-
Agent and Event Control conditions (χ 2
(1) = 2.3, p > .10). This result
Fig. 6. Average number of handling and non-handling predicates produced by homesigners per trial in each condition. Error bars show Poisson 95% confidence
intervals.
11 Although the dependent variable, number of predicates produced, is an
interval variable, we used a non-parametric statistic given our small sample
size.
L. Rissman, et al. Cognition 203 (2020) 104332
12
suggests that the homesigners used handling predicates to encode
agency (the distribution of their handshapes differed between No Agent
and Body-Agent), but not agent-backgrounding (the distribution of
their handshapes did not differ between Body-Agent and Hand-Agent).
Turning to production of non-handling predicates, we found that the
number of non-handling predicates also differed across the four con-
ditions (χ 2
(3) = 17.0, p < .001). Homesigners produced more non-
handling predicates in the Event Control condition than the Body-Agent
condition (χ2
(1) = 4, p < .05), and marginally more non-handling
predicates in the No Agent condition than in the Body-Agent condition
(χ 2
(1) = 3.1, p = .08). Non-handling predicates did not differ between
the Body-Agent and Hand-Agent conditions (χ2 (1) = 0.06, p > .10).
This result suggests that homesigners used non-handling predicates to
encode agency, but not to encode agent-backgrounding; that is, they
displayed the same patterns in their lexical and morphological devices.
Analyzing the data at the level of the trial (Fig. 7), we found that,
like NSL signers, homesigners primarily produced trials containing only
non-handling handshapes in the No Agent condition, and only handling
handshapes in the Body-Agent condition. With respect to the Hand-
Agent condition, they resembled NSL 1 signers (and not the NSL 2 & 3
signers): they displayed the same distribution of handshapes in the
Hand-Agent condition as in the Body-Agent condition. We evaluated
the contrasts between the Body-Agent condition and each of the three
other conditions using the Friedman rank sum test. The ranks were
different across the four conditions (χ 2
(3) = 50.1, p < .001) and
planned pairwise comparisons showed that ranks were significantly
higher in the Body-Agent condition than in the No Agent condition
(χ 2
(1) = 5.1, p < .05). Ranks did not differ, however, between the
Body-Agent and Hand-Agent conditions (χ2 (1) = 0.06, p > .10), and
ranks were only marginally higher in the Body-Agent condition than the
Event Control condition (χ2
(1) = 3.1, p = .08). Thus, at the level of an
entire utterance, homesigners encode agency but not agent-back-
grounding (despite the fact that homesigners can use handshape to
communicate about particularly patient-oriented events, i.e., the Event
Control videos).
Averaging across the four homesigners provides a view into how
likely an adult Nicaraguan homesigner is to distinguish the four event
conditions. It is important to keep in mind, however, that homesigners
do not share a linguistic system with each other (they do not know one
another), nor even with their main communication partners (Carrigan &
Coppola, 2017). As mentioned, homesigners sometimes show con-
siderable variability in the types of linguistic structures present in their
systems (Coppola, 2002; Coppola & So, 2006; Horton, 2018; Horton
et al., 2017). Although the homesigners we studied showed no evidence
of distinguishing the Body-Agent and Hand-Agent events in the ag-
gregate, there may be evidence that individual homesigners do so.
Figs. 8–9 show individual homesigner data: the average number of
handling and non-handling predicates produced in each condition
(Fig. 8) and the proportion of trials falling under each by-trial strategy
type in each condition (Fig. 9).
Fig. 7. Average proportion of homesign trials containing only handling handshapes, only non-handling handshapes, or both handling and non-handling handshapes
in each condition. Error bars show binomial 95% confidence intervals calculated using the Wilson method.
Fig. 8. Average number of handling and non-handling predicates produced per trial in each condition by each homesigner.
L. Rissman, et al. Cognition 203 (2020) 104332
13
Figs. 8–9 show that individual signers encode a distinction between
agentive and non-agentive events: all four homesigners produce more
handling predicates in the Body-Agent condition than the No Agent
condition. In addition, three homesigners produce more non-handling
predicates in the No Agent condition than the Body-Agent condition. All
four homesigners produce a greater proportion of non-handling-only
trials in the No Agent condition than the Body-Agent condition. Inter-
estingly, the two homesigners who distinguish Body-Agent and No
Agent videos most clearly through handshape (Homesigners 1 & 4) are
the two homesigners who never produced agent nominals.
In contrast to encoding agency, encoding agent-backgrounding at
the individual level is less clear. Each homesigner displayed similar
patterns in Body-Agent and Hand-Agent videos (although the pattern
was not the same across the four homesigners). Fig. 9 shows that
Homesigners 2 and 3 used identical response strategies across the Body-
Agent and Hand-Agent conditions. Homesigner 1 produced both
handling and non-handling predicates in the Body-Agent condition but
not in the Hand-Agent condition. This distinction is the reverse of the
NSL 2 & 3 pattern shown in Fig. 5. In summary, none of the four
homesigners showed a clear morphological distinction between Body-
Agent and Hand-Agent.
3.4. Discussion
The results of Study 2 show, in line with previous research, that
homesigners robustly use a morphological strategy (handshape in event
descriptions) to encode a distinction between agentive events and non-
agentive events. We find minimal evidence, however, for morphological
encoding of agent-backgrounding among homesigners. At the group
level, homesigners did not use handshape to distinguish Body-Agent
events from Hand-Agent events, and there was no strong evidence that
individual homesigners do so (despite the fact that homesigners were
able to use non-handling handshapes to encode a conceptually promi-
nent patient in the Event Control videos). Recall from Section 2.5.2 that
all ten NSL 2 & 3 signers showed at least one of the following patterns:
producing more handling-only responses in Body-Agent than in Hand-
Agent, or producing more non-handling-only responses in Hand-Agent
than in Body-Agent. By contrast, only one homesigner (Homesigner 1)
showed one of these patterns (and this homesigner showed a mixed
response not clearly indicating agent-backgrounding; see Fig. 9). In
total, these results are consistent with the model of language evolution
proposed in Heine and Kuteva (2007), that language that encodes
agent-backgrounding emerges after language that distinguishes agents
from non-agents.
The agent nominal data for homesigners also supports this
conclusion, but more tentatively, as only two out of four homesigners
produced any agent nominals. Nonetheless, both of these homesigners
used agent nominals to distinguish agentive events from non-agentive
events, whereas only one homesigner (Homesigner 2) made a sharp
distinction between Body-Agent and Hand-Agent events using agent
nominals. The pattern shown by Homesigner 2 suggests that agent-
backgrounding emerges through lexical devices before morphological
devices.
One explanation for the results in Experiments 1 and 2 is that
homesigners and NSL 1 signers are more limited in the range of se-
mantic distinctions they can encode than NSL 2 & 3 signers are. This
explanation may seem counterintuitive––if a group of signers is able to
use distribution of handling and non-handling predicates to distinguish
agentive from non-agentive videos, why would they not be able to
contrastively distribute the same predicates to encode agent-back-
grounding? In Experiment 3, we ask whether a limitation in the avail-
able communication system can, in principle, prevent participants from
distinguishing Body-Agent from Hand-Agent videos. In this experiment,
English-speaking adults described the stimuli using only their hands (a
“silent gesture” study, Goldin-Meadow, McNeill, & Singleton, 1996;
Goldin-Meadow, So, Özyürek, & Mylander, 2008). We know from pre-
vious work that English speakers conceptually distinguish Body-Agent
and Hand-Agent scenes and encode this distinction in their language in
an experimental setting (Rissman et al., 2019; footnote 4). But the silent
gesture paradigm imposes significant restrictions on the mode of Eng-
lish speakers' communication. That is, since English speakers are un-
accustomed to having the manual modality be their sole channel of
communication, they are limited in their ability to utilize this com-
municative channel. If silent gesturers encode agency but not agent-
backgrounding, we would have in-principle evidence that limitations in
the linguistic system could account for homesigners and NSL 1 signers
not encoding agent-backgrounding via handshape morphology.
4. Experiment 3: Silent gesture
4.1. Participants
12 adult native English speakers participated in Experiment 3
(F = 6, mean age = 26, range = 18–77). These speakers did not have
experience with a signed language. An additional two participants were
tested but were excluded for having studied American Sign Language.
Participants were tested on the University of Chicago campus and re-
ceived either course credit or $5 as compensation.
Fig. 9. Proportion of homesign trials containing only handling handshapes, only non-handling handshapes, or both handling and non-handling handshapes in each
condition by each homesigner.
L. Rissman, et al. Cognition 203 (2020) 104332
14
4.2. Design, materials, procedure and coding
The design and stimuli were the same as in Experiments 1–2.
Participants were instructed to describe the videos without using their
voice, using only their hands, arms, face or body; i.e., “silent gesture”.
Participants were also instructed not to stand up from their chair or use
physical props in their descriptions. Participants completed two prac-
tice videos so that the experimenter could verify that they were com-
fortable producing descriptions without their voice.
Gesturers did not routinely produce labels for the agent (e.g., MAN,
WOMAN), possibly because these meanings are non-trivial to convey
iconically and gesturers do not share a conventionalized lexicon. Some
gesturers produced a 2-legged stick figure with their middle and index
fingers in an inverted V-shape, which were coded as agent nominals.
Deictic gestures referencing either the signer's body or the stick figure
gesture itself were also coded as agent nominals. As with the homesign
data, we did not calculate reliability across the gesturers' agent nom-
inals, as these were identified on an individual basis.
The coding procedure for event descriptions was the same as in
Experiments 1–2. In general, the handshapes of the silent gesturers
were looser and more difficult to categorize than the handshapes of the
signers and the homesigners. For this reason, two coders coded hand-
shape for all of the silent gesture descriptions, and the second coder
reported her confidence about the handshape coding (1 = not at all
confident, 2 = moderately confident, 3 = completely confident). We
calculated agreement between the two handshape codings (handling vs.
non-handling handshape) across all predicates. Agreement was 57% for
confidence level 1, 88% for confidence level 2, and 100% for con-
fidence level 3. We excluded predicates with confidence level 1 from
further analysis (N = 7). For the remaining predicates, overall agree-
ment between the two codings was 91%.
4.3. Results
4.3.1. Agent omission analysis
Only four of the 12 gesturers produced agent nominals. One of these
gesturers produced agent nominals on 100% of Body-Agent trials and
50% of Hand-Agent trials (nine agent nominals in total). The other
three gesturers produced agent nominals only in the Body-Agent con-
dition, producing five, two and one agent nominals, respectively. Agent
omission does not thus appear to be a robust strategy for encoding ei-
ther agency or agent-backgrounding in silent gesture, although a few
gesturers may be using agent nominals systematically. The two ges-
turers who produced a sizeable number of agent nominals patterned
like Homesigners 2–3, with more agent labels in the Body-Agent con-
dition than in the Hand-Agent condition.
4.3.2. Predicate handshape analysis
The gesturers failed to produce a predicate on only 2% of trials;
these trials were excluded from analysis. Fig. 10 shows the average
number of handling and non-handling predicates that gesturers pro-
duced in each of the four conditions.
We analyzed production of handling and non-handling predicates
using mixed effects models and the lme4 package for R, assuming an
underlying Poisson distribution. The best-fitting model of handling
handshape production included the Condition effect. Gesturers pro-
duced fewer handling predicates in the No Agent condition than in the
Body-Agent condition (β = −1.47, SE = 0.34, p < .001). Handling
handshape production did not differ, however, between Body-Agent
and Hand-Agent (β = −0.13, SE = 0.22, p > .1), or between Body-
Agent and Event Control (β = −0.24, SE = 0.22, p > .1). The best-
fitting model of non-handling predicate production also included the
Condition effect. Gesturers produced more non-handling predicates in
the No Agent condition than in the Body-Agent condition (β = 1.08,
SE = 0.27, p < .001). Production of non-handling predicates did not
differ, however, between the Hand-Agent and Body-Agent (β = 0.38,
SE = 0.30, p > .1) or between Event Control and Body-Agent
(β = 0.45, SE = 0.30, p < .01).
Analyzing handshape strategy at the level of the trial (Fig. 11), we
find that gesturers clearly distinguished the Body-Agent and No Agent
conditions: ‘only handling’ was the predominant response for Body-
Agent trials, whereas ‘only non-handling’ was the predominant re-
sponse for No Agent trials. However, Hand-Agent trials were similar to
Body-Agent trials––‘only handling’ was the predominant response in
both types of trials, as it was in Event Control trials; silent gesturers thus
do not distinguish Body-Agent from Event Control trials to the same
degree that NSL signers and homesigners do.
We evaluated the contrasts between the Body-Agent condition and
each of the three other conditions using the Friedman rank sum test. For
silent gesture, the ranks were different across the four conditions
(χ 2
(3) = 22.3, p < .01) and planned pairwise comparisons showed that
ranks were significantly higher in the Body-Agent condition than in the
No Agent condition (χ2 (1) = 18.7, p < .01). Ranks did not differ,
however, between the Body-Agent and Hand-Agent conditions
(χ 2
(1) = 1.1, p > .10), or between the Body-Agent and Event Control
conditions (χ 2
(1) = 1.4, p > .1).
4.4. Discussion
Like the NSL signers and homesigners, silent gesturers used hand-
shape robustly to encode agency (handling handshape in Body-Agent
vs. non-handling handshape in No Agent events). This finding under-
scores the prominence of the iconic mapping between agency and
handling handshape, as even hearing speakers with minimal experience
communicating solely in the manual modality were able to draw on this
iconicity.
Beyond agency, however, silent gesturers' linguistic expression was
limited. Like NSL 1 signers and homesigners, they did not use hand-
shape to encode agent-backgrounding. In contrast to these two types of
signers, however, silent gesturers also failed to distinguish Body-Agent
videos from Event Control videos. As English speakers make both dis-
tinctions when using English (see footnote 4), this result suggests that
forcing English speakers to use an unfamiliar mode of communication
dramatically reduces the range of meanings they are able to convey.
We know from previous studies that, when speaking, English
speakers encode the agent in Hand-Agent videos as less conceptually
prominent than the agent in Body-Agent videos (Rissman et al., 2019).
We also know that English speakers are pragmatically motivated to
linguistically encode this distinction in an experimental setting, which
they do by increasing their use of passive voice in the Hand-Agent
condition. Experiment 3 therefore provides a “proof of concept” that
restrictions on the communication system can prevent a participant
from encoding agent-backgrounding. The conceptual and pragmatic
foundations for expressing a meaning can be present even if this
meaning is not expressed linguistically.
5. General discussion
At the outset of this paper, we raised three questions: first, is agent-
backgrounding communicatively important enough to arise in an
emerging language? Second, if it is, does agent-backgrounding arise at
the same moment as agency? Third, at what point in the development
of a language does it emerge – in homesign, in the context of a linguistic
community, or in the context of both a linguistic community and a
linguistic model? We draw three conclusions from the results reported
here, corresponding to these three questions: first, agent-backgrounding
has high communicative importance. We found that agent-back-
grounding was expressed through agent omission in NSL 1 (the first
generation to have had a linguistic community) and through handshape
morphology in NSL 2 & 3 (the first generation to have had a linguistic
model). Second, agent-backgrounding does not have the same core
cognitive status as agency. Across the three levels of emergence,
L. Rissman, et al. Cognition 203 (2020) 104332
15
linguistic devices for expressing agent-backgrounding did not emerge at
the same time as linguistic devices for expressing agency. This pattern
held for both a lexical device (omission of an agent nominal) and a
morphological device (distribution of handshape in classifier pre-
dicates). Third, receiving a linguistic system where agentive devices
were firmly established was necessary for the emergence of agent-
backgrounding morphology in NSL. In the sections that follow, we
discuss each of these conclusions and then consider how the linguistic
structures that we observed relate to broader typological patterns in
encoding of agent-backgrounding.
5.1. Communicative importance and core knowledge
Our results suggest that being able to deemphasize the role of the
agent in an event has deep communicative value. This result is perhaps
surprising, as English-speakers are often taught in school that passive
voice is communicatively inferior to active voice (see Ferreira, 2020).
On the contrary, our findings underscore the importance of cognitive
flexibility in shaping the range of linguistic structures that humans have
innovated. As language users we want to convey not only who did what
to whom – a representation which is strongly grounded in external
reality – but also our particular perspective on events and individuals in
the world. The finding that agent-backgrounding devices emerged so
rapidly in NSL predicts that agent-backgrounding constructions are
universal or nearly-universal across the established languages of the
world.
At the same time, agent-backgrounding does not appear to have the
same level of communicative importance as agency. This finding, in
turn, suggests that agent-backgrounding is not part of the core system of
agency proposed by Carey (2009). This result helps delimit the scope of
core cognition: as described earlier in Section 1, Gleitman et al. (2019)
argue that distinguishing symmetrical versus reciprocal construals of
events (a type of flexibility in event representation) does have a core,
foundational status.
Exploring the relatively slower emergence of agent-backgrounding
in more detail, we offer three explanations for why homesigners and
NSL 1 signers did not use handshape morphology to encode agent-
backgrounding. First, they may be less pragmatically motivated to
distinguish these events linguistically than NSL 2 & 3 signers. Second,
they may not represent the conceptual distinction between Body-Agent
and Hand-Agent scenes to the same degree that NSL 2 & 3 signers do.
Third, their morphosyntactic systems may not provide a means to dis-
tinguish these events. These explanations are not mutually exclusive.
The first possibility is that NSL 1 signers were less pragmatically
motivated to distinguish Body-Agent vs. Hand-Agent videos through
language than NSL 2 & 3 signers. These two types of videos have many
similarities and distinguishing between them may involve high-level
reasoning about the desires and expectations of the experimenters,
Fig. 10. Average number of handling and non-handling predicates produced by silent gesturers per trial in each condition. Error bars show Poisson 95% confidence
intervals.
Fig. 11. Average proportion of silent gesture trials containing only handling handshapes, only non-handling handshapes, or both handling and non-handling
handshapes in each condition. Error bars show binomial 95% confidence intervals calculated using the Wilson method.
L. Rissman, et al. Cognition 203 (2020) 104332
16
reasoning that may have been easier for NSL 2 & 3 signers than NSL 1
signers. This explanation is undercut, however, by the fact that NSL 1
signers did use agent nominals to distinguish Body-Agent from Hand-
Agent videos. The agent nominals finding shows that NSL 1 signers not
only attended to differences between the videos but were also moti-
vated to use language to encode these differences. In fact, one of the
homesigners (Homesigner 2) robustly used agent nominals to distin-
guish Body-Agent from Hand-Agent videos.
Considering the second, conceptual explanation, we note that some
conceptual differences between cohorts of NSL have been documented.
Relative to NSL 2 signers, NSL 1 signers show poorer theory of mind
performance (e.g., predicting a person's behavior when that person has
a false belief, Pyers & Senghas, 2009), as well as poorer spatial cogni-
tion (e.g., searching for a hidden object after disorientation, Pyers et al.,
2010). It is possible that construing an agentive scene from a patient-
oriented perspective requires cognitive flexibility, and that NSL 2 & 3
signers are more cognitively flexible than NSL 1 signers. In Section
3.3.1, we showed that NSL 1 signers were able to use agent nominals to
distinguish Body-Agent scenes from Hand-Agent scenes. This finding
shows that NSL 1 signers attended to and conceptualized differences
between these scenes, although we cannot be sure that NSL 1 signers
construed the Hand-Agent scenes from a patient-oriented perspective to
the same degree that NSL 2 & 3 signers did.
The third possibility is that homesigners and NSL 1 signers did not
use handshape morphology to distinguish Body-Agent from Hand-Agent
scenes because of limitations on the structure of their language. This
hypothesis is a reasonable explanation for the fact that the silent ges-
turers in Experiment 3 did not use handshape morphology to distin-
guish between Body-Agent and Hand-Agent videos. These English
speakers clearly have the conceptual and pragmatic tools to make this
distinction, and they use handshape to make a related distinction be-
tween agentive and non-agentive events. But their ability to encode
agent-backgrounding seems to be thwarted by their undeveloped
communication systems.
The dominant strategy for NSL 2 & 3 signers in the Body-Agent
condition was to produce only handling predicates, whereas their
dominant strategy in the Hand-Agent condition was to produce both
handling and non-handling predicates. Importantly, NSL 1 signers did
produce both handling and non-handling predicates in combination in
the Event Control condition, making it clear that they were able to
produce this type of response for events with a highly prominent pa-
tient. Thus, what seems to be missing for NSL 1 signers is a mapping
from handshape form to the agent-backgrounding function.
A similar point can be made for homesigners. As a group, they used
handling predicates on their own, as well as handling and non-handling
predicates in combination, to distinguish Body-Agent from No Agent
videos. They also used non-handling handshapes to distinguish Body-
Agent from Event Control videos, a strategy which they could have
extended to the Hand-Agent videos. Comparable to the NSL 1 signers,
the homesigners' linguistic systems appear to lack a mapping from
handshape form to the agent-backgrounding function.
Before we continue, one note of caution is warranted: the manip-
ulation we used, excluding the face/torso of the agent, is only one way
of eliciting agent-backgrounded event construals and agent-back-
grounding constructions. It is possible that a different manipulation
could have led the homesigners and NSL 1 signers to use handshape
morphology to encode agent-backgrounding. It is also possible that
homesigners and NSL 1 signers distinguished these types of events in
our data through a linguistic device that we were not sensitive to and
did not code. Nonetheless, the differences we see in the types of se-
mantic distinctions made by signers in the different cohorts provide
compelling evidence for an asymmetry between agency and agent-
backgrounding.
5.2. Precursors to the emergence of agent-backgrounding
In situations of language emergence, language users draw on the
existing structures in their language to innovate new form/meaning
mappings. A primary goal of our study was to understand the linguistic
building blocks and communicative dynamics that would enable the
innovation of agent-backgrounding constructions. Toward creating
agent-backgrounding morphology, our results point to the likely im-
portance of receiving a linguistic system in which agentive devices were
already well-established, as NSL 2 & 3 signers received.
Neither homesigners nor NSL 1 signers distinguished Body-Agent
from Hand-Agent events using handshape, but this does not mean that
these two groups used handshape morphology in identical ways. For the
first cohort of NSL, the contrast between Body-Agent events and No
Agent events is sharper than it is for homesigners. In the No Agent
condition, both groups of signers overwhelmingly produced trials with
only non-handling predicates. Homesigners also produced only non-
handling responses on 38% of Body-Agent trials. By contrast, NSL 1
signers never produced a trial that included only non-handling pre-
dicates in the Body-Agent condition.
Across cohorts of NSL signers, a handling predicate was produced at
least once on every trial that had an unambiguous agent (i.e., Body-
Agent trials). The clarity of the mapping between agency and handling
handshape may have paved the way for agent-backgrounding to
emerge. In Body-Agent and Hand-Agent trials, NSL 1 signers produced a
non-handling predicate on roughly 50% of trials. This behavior may
reflect a desire to represent the changed state of the patient as a se-
parate event component, a desire that could arise even for un-
ambiguously agentive events (see Loos, 2017). The system used by NSL
1 signers served as input to NSL 2 signers. It is therefore possible that
NSL 2 signers received these non-obligatory, non-handling predicates
and grammaticalized them to serve a semantic purpose: encoding
agent-backgrounding.
This hypothesis, that receiving a linguistic system with clear agen-
tive morphology enables the emergence of agent-backgrounding mor-
phology, may be tested using artificial language learning paradigms
(see Kirby, Cornish, & Smith, 2008, inter alia). Recall from Experiment
3 that silent gesturers used handshape morphology to distinguish Body-
Agent events from No Agent events, but less sharply than NSL 1 signers
did. We predict that silent gesturers who receive this probabilistic
system as input will not innovate agent-backgrounding handshape
morphology, but silent gesturers receiving a categorical agent-marking
morphological system will.
One prior study that we are aware of has investigated agent-back-
grounding constructions in emerging signed languages: Horton et al.
(2017) found that one out of four child homesigners showed a pattern
of results similar to the NSL 2 & 3 signers, using handshape morphology
to express both agency and agent-backgrounding. At first glance, this
result appears incompatible with our conclusion that agent-back-
grounding does not have the same priority for linguistic encoding as
agency. A more in-depth look reveals, however, that this child home-
signer has a deaf homesigning parent. It may therefore be the case that
this child received a homesign system from her parent in which mor-
phological marking of agency was already clear-cut, compatible with
the dynamics of agent-backgrounding emergence that we observed in
NSL.
5.3. Typology and the future of NSL
In this final section, we consider the trajectory of change from
homesigners to NSL 1 to NSL 2 & 3 and how the NSL findings fit into a
broader typological perspective. We found an asymmetry between the
lexical strategy and the morphological strategy for encoding agent-
backgrounding, with the former emerging before the latter in NSL. This
observation raises the question of how agent-backgrounding will con-
tinue to grammaticalize in NSL. We observed that the predominant
L. Rissman, et al. Cognition 203 (2020) 104332
17
strategy for NSL 2 & 3 signers in the Hand-Agent condition was to
produce handling and non-handling predicates in combination. To the
extent that these groupings of signs are represented as a unit, we might
be observing the emergence of a serial verb structure (see the Mandarin
serial verb passive in example 4). As described in Section 2.5.3, the
majority of the “Both” trials featured the consecutive sequence [hand-
ling – non-handling]. As NSL continues to evolve, this dominant pattern
may become even more prevalent.
Regarding the interaction between agent nominals and handshape,
Table 2 shows that NSL 2 & 3 signers sometimes described Hand-Agent
videos with utterances where there were no agent nominals and only
non-handling predicates. It is unclear whether such utterances would be
interpreted as depicting agentive events if they were produced outside
the context of the experiment (keeping in mind the standard caveat that
we do not know whether we coded all of the agentive devices that NSL
signers have at their disposal). If such utterances are ambiguous be-
tween agent-backgrounded and non-agentive interpretations, then we
would expect them to be disfavored among future generations of NSL.
Turning to how NSL is positioned within linguistic typology, we
found that all cohorts of NSL and one homesigner used an agent
omission strategy to convey agent-backgrounding. As discussed in
Section 1.2, this device is attested for other sign languages. We did not
find evidence, however, that NSL uses impersonal constructions for
agent-backgrounding (e.g., using signs such as ONE or PERSON to
convey non-specific reference), which are also well-documented across
sign languages (Barberà & Hofherr, 2018). We are not aware of studies
investigating directly whether signers of more established sign lan-
guages use handshape in classifier predicates to convey agent-back-
grounding. Nonetheless, signers across a range of languages have been
shown to use object handshape classifiers when describing agentive
events (Goldin-Meadow et al., 2015; Kimmelman, de Lint, et al., 2019).
Future research can address whether these classifiers are serving an
agent-backgrounding function.
6. Conclusion
Ours is one of the first studies investigating the emergence of agent-
backgrounding constructions in young languages. We found that users
of an emerging language innovated agent-backgrounding constructions,
indicating the communicative importance of downplaying the role of an
agent in an event. At the same time, we found that agent-back-
grounding language did not emerge at the same time as agentive lan-
guage in NSL, homesign, and silent gesture, suggesting that agent-
backgrounding does not have the same core status as agency. We also
observed different trajectories of emergence for different types of lin-
guistic devices––agent-backgrounding emerged first through a lexical
strategy (omission of an agent nominal) and then through handshape
morphology in classifier predicates. For signers to innovate agent-
backgrounding morphology, having a linguistic model to build from
appears to be a necessary precondition.
CRediT authorship contribution statement
Lilia Rissman:Conceptualization, Methodology, Software,
Formal analysis, Investigation, Data curation, Writing - original
draft, Writing - review & editing, Visualization, Supervision,
Funding acquisition.Laura Horton:Conceptualization, -
Methodology, Data curation, Writing - original draft.Molly
Flaherty:Methodology, Investigation, Writing - original draft.Ann
Senghas:Investigation, Writing - original draft, Writing - review &
editing.Marie Coppola:Investigation, Writing - original draft,
Writing - review & editing, Funding acquisition.Diane Brentari:
Conceptualization, Methodology, Writing - original draft, Writing -
review & editing, Funding acquisition. Susan Goldin-
Meadow:Conceptualization, Methodology, Writing - original draft,
Writing - review & editing, Funding acquisition.
Acknowledgments
This research was supported by NIH RO1 DC000491 awarded to
SGM, as well as a postdoctoral diversity supplement to LR through this
parent grant. This research was also supported by a Radboud University
Excellence Initiative fellowship awarded to LR, NSF CAREER 1553589
awarded to MC, NSF BCS-1227908 awarded to DB and MC and NSF
BCS-1918545 awarded to DB, MC and SGM. Also, NIH R01 DC005407
awarded to AS. Thank you to Deanna Gagne and Kurt Gagne for data
collection in Nicaragua. We also appreciate Chiara Pandolfi and
Madeline Quam for their hard work collecting data and coding. Thank
you to all study participants and their families.
