The Classical View
When you were in junior high school or even earlier, you probably had a teacher
who tried to get you to define words. Given a word like wildebeest, you might say
‘‘It’s a kind ofanimal.’’ Your teacher would not be satisfied with this definition,
though. ‘‘A frog is also a kind of animal,’’ she might point out, ‘‘Is it the same as a
frog?’’ ‘‘No,’’ you would reply sheepishly, ‘‘it has four legs and is about the size of a
cow and has horns and lives in Africa.’’ Well, now you’re getting somewhere. My
teacher used to tell us that a definition should include everything that is described by
a word and nothing that isn’t. So, ifyour description ofa wildebeest picks out all
wildebeest and nothing else, you have given a successful definition. (In fact, most
definitions in dictionaries do not meet this criterion, but that is not our problem.)
Definitions have many advantages from a logical standpoint. For example, the
truth or falsity of ‘‘Rachel is a wildebeest’’ is something that can be determined
by referring to the definition: Does Rachel have all the properties listed in the
definition—four legs, horns, and so on? By saying ‘‘Rachel is not a wildebeest,’’ we
are saying that Rachel lacks one or more ofthe definitional properties ofwildebeest.
And we could potentially verify statements like ‘‘Wildebeest can be found in Sudan’’
by looking for things in Sudan that meet the definition. Philosophers have long
assumed that definitions are the appropriate way to characterize word meaning and
category membership. Indeed, the view can be traced back as far as Aristotle (see
Apostle 1980, pp. 6, 19–20). In trying to specify the nature of abstract concepts like
fairness or truth, or even more mundane matters such as causality and biological
kinds, philosophers have attempted to construct definitions ofthese terms. Once we
have a definition that will tell us what exactly is and is not a cause, we will have
come a long way toward understanding causality. And much philosophical argu-mentation involves testing past definitions against new examples, to see ifthey
work. Ifyou can find something that seems to be a cause but doesn’t fit the pro-
posed definition, then that definition ofcause can be rejected.
It is not surprising, then, that the early psychological approaches to concepts took
a definitional approach. I am not going to provide an extensive review, but a read-
ing ofthe most cited work on concepts written prior to 1970 reveals its assumption
ofdefinitions. I should emphasize that these writers did not always explicitly say,
‘‘I have a definitional theory ofconcepts.’’ Rather, they took such an approach for
granted and then went about making proposals for how people learned concepts
(i.e., learned these definitions) from experience.
For example, Clark Hull’s (1920) Ph.D. thesis was a study ofhuman concept
learning—perhaps surprisingly, given his enormous later influence as a researcher of
simple learning, usually in rats. Hull used adapted Chinese characters as stimuli.
Subjects viewed a character and then had to respond with one oftwelve supposedly
Chinese names (e.g., oo and yer). Each sign associated with a given name contained
a radical or component that was identical in the different signs. As figure 2.1 shows,
the oo characters all had the same radical: a kind oflarge check mark with two
smaller marks inside it. Clearly, then, Hull assumed that every example ofa concept
had some element that was critical to it.
There are two aspects to a definition that these items illustrate. The first we can
call necessity. The parts ofthe definition must be in the entity, or else it is not a
member ofthe category. So, ifa character did not have the check-mark radical, it
would not be an oo. Similarly, ifsomething doesn’t have a distinctive attribute of
chairs, it is not a chair. The second aspect we can call sufficiency. Ifsomething has
all the parts mentioned in the definition, then it must be a member ofthe category.
So, anything having that radical in Hull’s experiment would be an oo, regardless of
what other properties it had. Note that it is not enough to have one or two ofthe
Figure 2.1
Two concepts from Hull’s (1920) study. Subjects learned 12 concepts like this at a time, with
different characters intermixed. Subjects were to respond to each stimulus with the name at
left (oo and yer in this case). Note that each example ofa concept has the defining feature, the
radical listed in the ‘‘concept’’ column.
12 Chapter 2
parts mentioned in the definition—the item must have all ofthem: The parts ofthe
definition are ‘‘jointly sufficient’’ to guarantee category membership. So, it wouldn’t
be enough for something to be as big as a cow and be from Africa to be a wilde-
beest; the item must also be an animal, with four legs and horns, if those things are
included in our definition.
Hull (1920) explicitly adopted these aspects ofa definition (without calling them
by these names) in one ofthe principles he followed in creating his experiment
(p. 13): ‘‘All ofthe individual experiences which require a given reaction, must
contain certain characteristics which are at the same time common to all members of
the group requiring this reaction [i.e., necessary] and which are NOT found in any
members ofthe groups requiring different reactions [i.e., sufficient].’’ (Note that
Hull adopted the behaviorist notion that it is the common response or ‘‘reaction’’
that makes things be in the same category. In contrast, I will be talking about the
mental representations ofcategories.) Hull believed that this aspect ofthe experi-
ment was matched by real-world categories. He describes a child who hears the
word dog used in a number ofdifferent situations. ‘‘At length the time arrives when
the child has a ‘meaning’ for the word dog. Upon examination this meaning is found
to be actually a characteristic more or less common to all dogs and not common to
cats, dolls and ‘teddy-bears.’ But to the child, the process ofarriving at this meaning
or concept has been largely unconscious. He has never said to himself‘Lo! I shall
proceed to discover the characteristics common to all dogs but not enjoyed by cats
and ‘‘teddy-bears’’ ’ ’’ (p. 6). Note that although Hull says that ‘‘Upon examination
this meaning is . . . ,’’ he does not describe any examination that has shown this,
nor does he say what characteristics are common to all dogs. These omissions are
significant—perhaps even ominous—as we shall soon see.
In the next major study ofconcept learning, Smoke (1932—the field moved some-
what more slowly in those days) criticized the definitional aspect ofHull’s concepts.
He says quite strongly that ‘‘if any concepts have ever been formed in such a fashion,
they are very few in number. We confess our inability to think of a single one’’ (p. 3).
He also quotes the passage given above about how children learn the concept of
dog, and asks (pp. 3–4): ‘‘What, we should like to ask, is this ‘characteristic more or
less common to all dogs and not common to cats, dolls, and ‘‘teddy-bears’’ ’ that is
the ‘ ‘‘meaning’’ for the word dog’ . . . What is the ‘common element’ in ‘dog’? Is it
something within the visual stimulus pattern? Ifexact drawings were made ofall the
dogs now living, or even ofthose with which any given child is familiar, would they
‘contain certain strokes in common’ [like Hull’s characters] which could be ‘easily
observed imbedded in each’?’’
Typicality and the Classical View of Categories 13
One might think from this rather sarcastic attack on Hull’s position that Smoke is
going to take a very different position about what makes up a concept, one that is at
odds with the definitional approach described. That, however, is not the case.
Smoke’s objection is to the notion that there is a single, simple element that is com-
mon to all category members. (Although Hull’s stimuli do have such a simple ele-
ment in common, it is not so clear that he intended to say that all categories were
like this.) Smoke says ‘‘As one learns more and more about dogs, [one’s] concept of
‘dog’ becomes increasingly rich, not a closer approximation to some bare ‘element’ ’’
(p. 5). What Smoke feels is missing from Hull’s view is that the essential compo-
nents ofa concept are a complex offeatures that are connected by a specified rela-
tionship, rather than being a single common element. Smoke gives this example ofa
concept called ‘‘zum,’’ which he feels is more realistic: ‘‘Three straight red lines, two
ofwhich intersect the third, thereby trisecting it’’ (p. 9). You may judge for yourself
whether this is more realistic than Hull’s Chinese characters. In teaching such con-
cepts, Smoke made up counterexamples that had some ofthe components ofthe
concept but not all ofthem. Thus, for a nonzum, he might make up something with
only two lines or something with three lines but that did not intersect one another in
the required way. Thus, he created a situation that precisely follows the definitional
view: Zums had all the required properties, and for the items that did not, subjects
had to learn not to call them zums. Thus, the properties ofzums were necessary and
sufficient.
In short, although Smoke seems to be rejecting the idea ofconcepts as being
formed by definitions, he in fact accepts this view. The main difference between his
view and Hull’s is that he viewed the definitions as being more complex than (he
thought) Hull did. I have gone through these examples in part to show that one can
tell whether experimenters had the definitional view by looking at their stimuli. In
many older (pre-1970) studies ofconcepts, all the members have elements in com-
mon, which are not found in the nonmembers. Thus, even if such studies did not
explicitly articulate this definitional view, they presupposed it.
The work ofHull and Smoke set the stage for research within American experi-
mental psychology’s study ofconcepts. In addition to their view ofconcepts, the
techniques they developed for concept learning studies are still in use today. Another
influence that promoted the use ofdefinitions in the study ofconcepts was the work
ofPiaget in cognitive development. Piaget viewed thought as the acquisition of
logical abilities, and therefore he viewed concepts as being logical entities that could
be clearly defined. Again, Piaget did not so much argue for this view of concepts as
simply assume it. For example, Inhelder and Piaget’s (1964, p. 7) theory relied on
14 Chapter 2
constructs such as: ‘‘the ‘intension’ ofa class is the set ofproperties common to the
members ofthat class, together with the set ofdifferences, which distinguish them
from another class’’—that is, a definition. Following this, they provide a list of logical
properties ofcategories which they argued that people must master in order to have
proper concepts. (Perhaps not surprisingly, they felt that children did not have true
concepts until well into school age—see chapter 10.) Piaget’s work was not directly
influential on most experimental researchers ofadult concepts, but it helped to bolster
the definitional view by its extraordinary influence in developmental psychology.
Main Claims of the Classical View
The pervasiveness ofthe idea ofdefinitions was so great that Smith and Medin
(1981) dubbed it the classical view ofconcepts. Here, then are the main claims of
the classical view. First, concepts are mentally represented as definitions. A defini-
tion provides characteristics that are a) necessary and b) jointly sufficient for mem-
bership in the category. Second, the classical view argues that every object is either
in or not in the category, with no in-between cases. This aspect ofdefinition was an
important part ofthe philosophical background ofthe classical view. According to
the law of the excluded middle, a rule oflogic, every statement is either true or false,
so long as it is not ambiguous. Thus, ‘‘Rachel is a wildebeest’’ is either true or false.
Ofcourse, we may not know what the truth is (perhaps we don’t know Rachel), but
that is not the point. The point is that in reality Rachel either is or isn’t a wildebeest,
with no in-between, even ifwe don’t know which possibility is correct. Third, the
classical view does not make any distinction between category members. Anything
that meets the definition is just as good a category member as anything else. (Aris-
totle emphasized this aspect ofcategories in particular.) An animal that has the fea-
ture common to all dogs is thereby a dog, just the same as any other thing that has
that feature. In a real sense, the definition is the concept according to the classical
view. So all things that meet the definition are perfectly good members of the con-
cept, and all things that do not fit the definition are equally ‘‘bad’’ members (i.e.,
nonmembers) ofthe concept, because there is nothing besides the definition that
could distinguish these things. As readers are no doubt thinking, this all sounds too
good to be true.
Before confirming this suspicion, it is worthwhile to consider what kind of re-
search should be done ifthe classical view is true. What is left to understand about
the psychology ofconcepts? The basic assumption was that concepts were acquired
by learning which characteristics were defining. However, unlike Hull’s assumption
(and more like Smoke’s), it became apparent that any real-world concepts would
Typicality and the Classical View of Categories 15
involve multiple features that were related in a complex way. For example, dogs
have four legs, bark, have fur, eat meat, sleep, and so on. Some subset of these fea-
tures might be part ofthe definition, rather than only one characteristic. Further-
more, for some concepts, the features could be related by rules, as in the following
(incomplete) definition ofa strike in baseball: ‘‘the ball must be swung at and missed
OR it must pass above the knees and below the armpits and over home plate with-
out being hit OR the ball must be hit foul (IF there are not two strikes).’’ The use of
logical connectives like AND, OR, and IF allows very complex concepts to be
defined, and concepts using such connectives were the ones usually studied in psy-
chology experiments. (There are not that many experiments to be done on how
people learn concepts that are defined by a single feature.) Often these definitions
were described as rules to tell what is in a category.
Bruner, Goodnow, and Austin (1956) began the study ofthis sort oflogically
specified concept, and a cottage industry sprang up to see how people learned them.
In such experiments, subjects would go through many cards, each ofwhich had a
picture or description on it. They would have to guess whether that item was in the
category or not, usually receiving feedback on their answer. For difficult concepts,
subjects might have to go through the cards a dozen times or more before reaching
perfect accuracy on categorizing items; for easy concepts, it might only take four or
five run-throughs (blocks). Research topics included how learning depended on the
number ofattributes in the rule, the relations used in the rule (e.g., AND vs. OR),
the way that category examples were presented (e.g., were they shown to the subject
in a set order, or could the subject select the ones he or she wished?), the complexity
ofthe stimuli, and so on. But whether this research is ofinterest to us depends on
whether we accept the classical view. Ifwe do not, then these experiments, although
valid as examples oflearning certain abstract rules, do not tell us about how people
learn normal concepts. With that foreshadowing, let us turn to the problems raised
for the classical view.
Problems for the Classical View
The groundbreaking work ofEleanor Rosch in the 1970s essentially killed the clas-
sical view, so that it is not now the theory ofany actual researcher in this area
(though we will see that a few theorists cling to it still). That is a pretty far fall for a
theory that had been the dominant one since Aristotle. How did it happen? In part it
happened by virtue oftheoretical arguments and in part by the discovery ofdata
that could not be easily explained by the classical view. Let us start with the argu-
16Chapter 2
ments. Because this downfall of the classical view has been very ably described by
Smith and Medin (1981) and others (e.g., Mervis and Rosch 1981; Rosch 1978), I
will spend somewhat less time on this issue than could easily be spent on it. Inter-
ested readers should consult those reviews or the original articles cited below for
more detailed discussion.

In-Principle Arguments
The philosopher Wittgenstein (1953) questioned the assumption that important
concepts could be defined. He used the concept ofa game as his example. It is
maddeningly difficult to come up with a definition of games that includes them
but does not include nongame sports (like hunting) or activities like kicking a ball
against a wall. Wittgenstein urged his readers not to simply say ‘‘There must be
something in common,’’ but to try to specify the things in common. Indeed, it turns
out to be very difficult to specify the necessary and sufficient features of most real-
world categories. So, the definition we gave earlier ofdogs, namely, things that have
four legs, bark, have fur, eat meat, and sleep, is obviously not true. Does something
have to have four legs to be a dog? Indeed, there are unfortunate dogs who have lost
a leg or two. How about having fur? Although most dogs do have fur, there are
hairless varieties like chihuahuas that don’t. What about barking? Almost all dogs
bark, but I have in fact known a dog that ‘‘lost’’ its bark as it got older. This kind of
argument can go on for some time when trying to arrive at necessary features. One
can find some features that seem a bit ‘‘more necessary’’ than these—abstract prop-
erties such as being animate and breathing appear to be true ofall dogs (we are
talking about real dogs here, and not toy dogs and the like). However, although
these features may be necessary, they are not nearly sufficient. In fact, all animals are
animate and breathe, not just dogs. So, features like these will not form adequate
definitions for dogs—they won’t separate dogs from other similar animals. Also,
sometimes people will propose features such as ‘‘canine’’ as being definitional of
dogs. However, this is just cheating. ‘‘Canine’’ is simply a synonym for the dog
concept itself, and saying that this is part of the definition of dog is not very different
from saying that the dogs all have the property of ‘‘dogginess.’’ Clearly, such circu-
lar definitions explain nothing.
Wittgenstein’s argument, which is now widely accepted in the field, does have a
problem, however (Smith and Medin 1981): It is primarily negative. It says some-
thing like ‘‘I can’t think of any defining features for games or dogs,’’ but this does
not prove that there aren’t any. Perhaps it’s just that we are not clever enough
to think of the defining features. Perhaps there are defining features that will be
Typicality and the Classical View of Categories 17
realized or discovered in 100 years. This may be true, but it is incumbent on some-
one who believes the classical view to explain what the defining features are, and
why we can’t easily think ofthem. Ifour concept ofdogs is a definition, why are we
so bad at saying what it is even when we know the concept? Why is it that we can
use this definition for identifying dogs and for thinking about them, but the proper-
ties we give for dogs are not definitional? The classical view has considerable trouble
explaining this.
I used to think that the arguments against the classical view might be somewhat
limited. In particular, it seemed likely to me that in certain technical domains, con-
cepts might be well defined. For example, the rules ofbaseball are written down in
black and white, and they look very much like the rules ofold category-learning
experiments (think ofthe disjunctive rule for a strike). Perhaps in the physical
sciences, one will find classical concepts, as the scientists will have figured out
the exact rules by which to decide something is a metal or a member ofa biological
genus. However, my own experience has always been that whenever one explores
these domains in greater depth, one finds more and more fuzziness, rather than per-
fectly clear rules.
For example, consider the following portion of a lecture on metals by a distin-
guished metallurgist (Pond 1987). He begins by attempting, unsuccessfully, to get
audience members to define what a metal is.
Well, I’ll tell you something. You really don’t know what a metal is. And there’s a big group
ofpeople that don’t know what a metal is. Do you know what we call them? Metal-
lurgists! . . . Here’s why metallurgists don’t know what metal is. We know that a metal is an
element that has metallic properties. So we start to enumerate all these properties: electrical
conductivity, thermal conductivity, ductility, malleability, strength, high density. Then you
say, how many ofthese properties does an element have to have to classify as a metal? And
do you know what? We can’t get the metallurgists to agree. Some say three properties; some
say five properties, six properties. We really don’t know. So we just proceed along presuming
that we are all talking about the same thing. (pp. 62–63)
And in biology, biologists are constantly fighting about whether things are two dif-
ferent species or not, and what species belong in the same genus, and so on. There is
no defining feature that identifies biological kinds (Mayr 1982). In 2000, there was
a dispute over whether Pluto is really a planet (apparently, it isn’t, though it is too
late to do anything about it now). Students in the town ofPluto’s discoverer put up
a web site demanding Pluto’s retention as a full-fledged planet. Among their points
was that the astronomers critical ofPluto’s planethood ‘‘don’t even have a definition
ofwhat a planet really is!’’ (Unfortunately, they did not provide their own defini-
tion.) The very fact that astronomers can argue about such cases is evidence that
18 Chapter 2
the notion ofplanet is not well defined. The idea that all science consists ofhard-
and-fast logical categories, in contrast to those of everyday life, may be a romantic
illusion.
One might well hope that legal concepts have a classical nature, so that definitions
can be evenly applied across the board. One does not want judges and juries having
to make decisions in fuzzy cases where there is no clear boundary between the legal
and illegal. However, legal practice has found that in practice the law is sometimes
very fuzzy, and legal theorists (e.g., Hart 1961) suggest that this is inevitably the
case, because lawmakers cannot foresee all the possibilities the law will have to ad-
dress, some ofwhich do not exist at the time the law is passed (e.g., laws on intel-
lectual property were written before the invention of the internet). Furthermore,
since laws are written in language that uses everyday concepts, to the degree that
these concepts are fuzzy, the law itself must be fuzzy. So, if one has a rule, ‘‘No
vehicles in the park’’ (Hart 1961), does one interpret that to include wheelchairs?
Maintenance vehicles? Ambulances? Bicycles? Although the law is stated in a sim-
ple, clear-cut manner, the fuzziness of the vehicle category prevents it from being
entirely well-defined. 1
Even artificial domains may have rules that are not particularly well defined. In
1999, Major League Baseball made a much publicized effort to clean up and stan-
dardize the strike zone, suggesting that my beliefthat strikes were well defined prior
to that was a delusion. Perhaps the only hope for true classical concepts is within
small, closed systems that simply do not permit exceptions and variation ofthe sort
that is found in the natural world. For example, the rules of chess may create clas-
sical concepts, like bishops and castling. Baseball, on the other hand, has too much
human behavior and judgment involved, and so its categories begin to resemble
natural categories in being less well defined than the purist would like.
Empirical Problems
Unfortunately for the classical view, its empirical problems are even greater than its
theoretical ones. One general problem is that the neatness envisioned by the classical
view does not seem to be a characteristic ofhuman concepts. As mentioned above,
the notion ofa definition implies that category membership can be discretely deter-
mined: The definition will pick out all the category members and none ofthe non-
members. Furthermore, there is no need to make further distinctions among the
members or among the nonmembers. In real life, however, there are many things
that are not clearly in or out ofa category. For example, many people express un-
certainty about whether a tomato is a vegetable or a fruit. People are not sure about
Typicality and the Classical View of Categories 19
whether a low, three-legged seat with a little back is a chair or a stool. People do not
always agree on whether sandals are a kind ofshoe. This uncertainty gets even
worse when more contentious categories in domains such as personality or aes-
thetics are considered. Is Sergeant Pepper’s Lonely Hearts Club Band a work ofart?
Is your neighbor just shy or stuck up? These kinds ofcategorizations are often
problematic.
Research has gone beyond this kind ofanecdote. For example, Hampton (1979)
asked subjects to rate a number ofitems on whether they were category members
for different categories. He did not find that items were segregated into clear mem-
bers and nonmembers. Instead, he found a number of items that were just barely
considered category members and others that were just barely not members. His
subjects just barely included sinks as members ofthe kitchen utensil category and
just barely excluded sponges; they just included seaweed as a vegetable and just
barely excluded tomatoes and gourds. Indeed, he found that for seven of the eight
categories he investigated, members and nonmembers formed a continuum, with no
obvious break in people’s membership judgments.
Such results could be due to disagreements among different subjects. Perhaps
55% ofthe subjects thought that sinks were clearly kitchen utensils and 45%
thought they were clearly not. This would produce a result in which sinks appeared
to be a borderline case, even though every individual subject had a clear idea of
whether they were category members or not. Thus, the classical view might be true
for each individual, even though the group results do not show this. However,
McCloskey and Glucksberg (1978) were able to make an even stronger argument
for such unclear cases. They found that when people were asked to make repeated
category judgments such as ‘‘Is an olive a fruit?’’ or ‘‘Is a dog an animal?’’ there was
a subset ofitems that individual subjects changed their minds about. That is, ifyou
said that an olive was a fruit on one day, two weeks later you might give the oppo-
site answer. Naturally, subjects did not do this for cases like ‘‘Is a dog an animal?’’
or ‘‘Is a rose an animal?’’ But they did change their minds on borderline cases, such
as olive-fruit, and curtains-furniture. In fact, for items that were intermediate be-
tween clear members and clear nonmembers, McCloskey and Glucksberg’s subjects
changed their mind 22% ofthe time. This may be compared to inconsistent deci-
sions of under 3% for the best examples and clear nonmembers (see further dis-
cussion below). Thus, the changes in subjects’ decisions do not reflect an overall
inconsistency or lack ofattention, but a bona fide uncertainty about the borderline
members. In short, many concepts are not clear-cut. There are some items that one
cannot make up one’s mind about or that seem to be ‘‘kind of’’ members. An avo-
20 Chapter 2
The Necessity of Category Fuzziness
The existence ofunclear examples can be understood in part as arising from the great
variation ofthings in the world combined with the limitations on our concepts. We do
not wish to have a concept for every single object—such concepts would be of little use
and would require enormous memory space. Instead, we want to have a fairly small
number of concepts that are still informative enough to be useful (Rosch 1978). The
ideal situation would probably be one in which these concepts did pick out objects in a
classical-like way. Unfortunately, the world is not arranged so as to conform to our
needs.
For example, it may be useful to distinguish chairs from stools, due to their differ-
ences in size and comfort. For the most part, we can distinguish the two based on the
number oftheir legs, presence ofa back or arms, and size. However, there is nothing to
stop manufacturers from making things that are very large, comfortable stools; things
that are just like chairs, only with three legs; or stools with a back. These intermediate
items are the things that cause trouble for us, because they partake of the properties of
both. We could try to solve this by forming different categories for stools with four legs
(stegs), for chairs with three legs (chools), stools with backs (stoocks), stools with backs
and arms (stoorms), and so on. But by doing so, we would end up increasing our nec-
essary vocabulary by a factor of 5 or 10, depending on how many distinctions we
added for every category. And there would still be the problem of intermediate items, as
manufacturers would no doubt someday invent a combination that was between a
stoock and a stoorm, and that would then be an atypical example ofboth. Just to be
difficult, they would probably also make stools with no back, with very tiny backs, with
somewhat tiny backs, . . . up to stools with enormous, high backs. Thus, there would
be items in between the typical stools and stoocks where categorization would be
uncertain.
The gradation ofproperties in the world means that our smallish number ofcatego-
ries will never map perfectly onto all objects: The distinction between members and
nonmembers will always be difficult to draw or will even be arbitrary in some cases. If
the world existed as much more distinct clumps ofobjects, then perhaps our concepts
could be formed as the classical view says they are. But if the world consists of shadings
and gradations and ofa rich mixture ofdifferent kinds ofproperties, then a limited
number ofconcepts would almost have to be fuzzy.
Typicality and the Classical View of Categories 21
cado is ‘‘kind ofa vegetable,’’ even ifit is not wholeheartedly a vegetable. The clas-
sical view has difficulty explaining this state of affairs; certainly, it did not predict it.
Another problem for the classical view has been the number of demonstrations of
typicality effects. These can be illustrated by the following intuition. Think of a fish,
any fish. Did you think ofsomething like a trout or a shark, or did you think ofan
eel or a flounder? Most people would admit to thinking ofsomething like the first: a
torpedo-shaped object with small fins, bilaterally symmetrical, which swims in the
water by moving its tail from side to side. Eels are much longer, and they slither;
flounders are also differently shaped, aren’t symmetrical, and move by waving their
body in the vertical dimension. Although all ofthese things are technically fish, they
do not all seem to be equally good examples offish. The typical category members
are the good examples—what you normally think ofwhen you think ofthe cate-
gory. The atypical objects are ones that are known to be members but that are un-
usual in some way. (Note that atypical means ‘‘not typical,’’ rather than ‘‘a typical
example.’’ The stress is on the first syllable.) The classical view does not have any
way ofdistinguishing typical and atypical category members. Since all the items in
the category have met the definition’s criteria, all are category members. (Later I will
try to expand the classical view to handle this problem.)
What is the evidence for typicality differences? Typicality differences are probably
the strongest and most reliable effects in the categorization literature. The simplest
way to demonstrate this phenomenon is simply to ask people to rate items on how
typical they think each item is ofa category. So, you could give people a list offish
and ask them to rate how typical each one is ofthe category fish. Rosch (1975) did
this task for 10 categories and looked to see how much subjects agreed with one
another. She discovered that the reliability oftypicality ratings was an extremely
high .97 (where 1.0 would be perfect agreement)—though later studies have sug-
gested that this is an overestimate (Barsalou 1987). In short, people agree that a
trout is a typical fish and an eel is an atypical one.
But does typicality affect people’s use of the categories? Perhaps the differences
in ratings are just subjects’ attempt to answer the question that experimenters are
asking. Yes, a trout is a typical fish, but perhaps this does not mean that trouts are
any better than eels in any other respect. Contrary to this suggestion, typicality dif-
ferences influence many different behaviors and judgments involving concepts. For
example, recall that I said earlier that McCloskey and Glucksberg (1978) found that
subjects made inconsistent judgments for only a subset of their items. These items
could be predicted on the basis oftypicality. Subjects did not change their minds
about the very typical items or the clear nonitems, but about items in the middle of
the scale, the atypical members and the ‘‘close misses’’ among the nonmembers. For
22 Chapter 2
example, waste baskets are rated as atypical examples offurniture (4.70, where 1 is
low and 10 is high), and subjects changed their minds about this item a surprising
30% ofthe time. They never changed their minds about tables, a very typical member
(rated 9.83), or windows, a clear nonmember (rated 2.53).
Rips, Shoben, and Smith (1973) found that the ease with which people judged
category membership depended on typicality. For example, people find it very easy
to affirm that a robin is a bird but are much slower to affirm that a chicken (a less
typical item) is a bird. This finding has also been found with visual stimuli: Identi-
fying a picture of a chicken as a bird takes longer than identifying a pictured robin
(Murphy and Brownell 1985; Smith, Balzano, and Walker 1978). The influence of
typicality is not just in identifying items as category members—it also occurs with
the production of items from a category. Battig and Montague (1969) performed a
very large norming study in which subjects were given category names, like furni-
ture or precious stone and had to produce examples ofthese categories. These data
are still used today in choosing stimuli for experiments (though they are limited, as a
number ofcommon categories were not included). Mervis, Catlin and Rosch (1976)
showed that the items that were most often produced in response to the category
names were the ones rated as typical (by other subjects). In fact, the average corre-
lation oftypicality and production frequency across categories was .63, which is
quite high given all the other variables that affect production.
When people learn artificial categories, they tend to learn the typical items before
the atypical ones (Rosch, Simpson, and Miller 1976). Furthermore, learning is faster
ifsubjects are taught on mostly typical items than ifthey are taught on atypical
items (Mervis and Pani 1980; Posner and Keele 1968). Thus, typicality is not just a
feeling that people have about some items (‘‘trout good; eels bad’’)—it is important
to the initial learning ofthe category in a number ofrespects. As we shall see when
we discuss the explanations oftypicality structure, there is a very good reason for
typicality to have these influences on learning.
Learning is not the end ofthe influence, however. Typical items are more useful
for inferences about category members. For example, imagine that you heard that
eagles had caught some disease. How likely do you think it would be to spread to
other birds? Now suppose that it turned out to be larks or robins who caught the
disease. Rips (1975) found that people were more likely to infer that other birds
would catch the disease when a typical bird, like robins, had it than when an atypi-
cal one, like eagles, had it (see also Osherson et al. 1990; and chapter 8).
As I will discuss in chapter 11, there are many influences oftypicality on language
learning and use. Just to mention some ofthem, there are effects on the order of
word production in sentences and in comprehension ofanaphors.
Kelly, Bock, and Keil (1986) showed that when subjects mentioned two category members together
in a sentence, the more typical one is most likely to be mentioned first. That is,
people are more likely to talk about ‘‘apples and limes’’ than about ‘‘limes and
apples.’’ Garrod and Sanford (1977) asked subjects to read stories with category
members in them. For example, they might read about a goose. Later, a sentence
would refer to that item with a category name, such as ‘‘The bird came in through
the front door.’’ Readers took longer to read this sentence when it was about a
goose (an atypical bird) than when it was about a robin (a typical bird). Rosch
(1975) found that typical items were more likely to serve as cognitive reference
points. For example, people were more likely to say that a patch ofoff-red color
(atypical) was ‘‘virtually’’ the same as a pure red color (typical) than they were to
say the reverse. Using these kinds ofnonlinguistic stimuli showed that the benefit of
the more typical color was not due to word frequency or other aspects of the words
themselves. Similarly, people prefer to say that 101 is virtually 100 rather than 100
is virtually 101.
This list could go on for some time. As a general observation, one can say that
whenever a task requires someone to relate an item to a category, the item’s typi-
cality influences performance. This kind of result is extremely robust. In fact, if one
compares different category members and does not find an effect of typicality, it
suggests that there is something wrong with—or at least unusual about—the ex-
periment. It is unfortunate for the classical view, therefore, that it does not predict
the most prevalent result in the field. Even ifit is not specifically disproved by typi-
cality effects (see below), it is a great shortcoming that the view does not actually
explain why and how they come about, since these effects are ubiquitous.
Revision of the Classical View
As a result ofthe theoretical arguments and the considerable evidence against the
classical view, a number ofwriters have attempted to revise it so that it can handle
the typicality data and unclear members. The main way to handle this has been to
make a distinction between two aspects ofcategory representation, which I will call
the core and identification procedures (following Miller and Johnson-Laird 1976;
see Armstrong, Gleitman, and Gleitman 1983; Osherson and Smith 1981; Smith
and Medin 1981; and Smith, Rips, and Shoben 1974 for similar ideas). The basic
idea is as follows. Although concepts do have definitions (which we have not yet
been able to discover), people have also learned other things about them that aren’t
definitional. This kind of information helps us to identify category members or to
24 Chapter 2
use information that is not defining. For example, not all dogs have fur, so having
fur cannot be part of the definition of the dog category. However, it is still useful to
use fur as a way of identifying dogs, because so many of them do have it. Thus,
‘‘fur’’ would be part of the identification procedure by which we tell what actual
dogs are, but it would not be part ofthe concept core, which contains only the def-
inition. One could call ‘‘fur’’ a characteristic feature, since it is generally true ofdogs
even ifnot always true: Characteristically, dogs have fur.
Part ofthe problem with this proposal is that it is not clear what the concept core
is supposed to do. Ifit isn’t used to identify the category members, then what is it
for? All the typicality effects listed above must arise from the identification proce-
dure, since the category core by definition (sic) does not distinguish typicality of
members. One proposal is that people use the identification procedure for fast and
less reliable categorization, but that they will use the category core for more careful
categorization or reasoning (e.g., Armstrong et al. 1983; Smith et al. 1974). Thus,
when tasks involve more careful thought, with less time pressure than in many
experiments, people might be encouraged to use the category core more. For exam-
ple, Armstrong et al. (1983) found that people took longer to identify less typical
even numbers than more typical ones (e.g., 4 is a more typical even number than 38
is). However, since subjects know the rule involving even numbers and are ex-
tremely accurate at this, they may use the category core to ultimately decide the
question. Whether this argument can be extended to items that do not have such a
clear rule, ofcourse, needs to be considered.
In summary, on this revised view, the effects of typicality result from the identifi-
cation procedures, whereas certain other behaviors (primarily categorization deci-
sions) depend primarily on the concept core.
I will criticize this theory at the end ofthe chapter. However, there have been
some empirical tests ofthis proposal as well. First, Hampton’s (1979) study men-
tioned above also included a component in which subjects listed properties ofdif-
ferent categories, and he attempted to separate defining from characteristic features.
For example, subjects first said what properties they used to decide that something
was a fruit. Other subjects then evaluated examples of fruit and similar objects to
see which ones had the properties. So, they would have considered whether apple
and avocado have properties such as ‘‘is from a plant,’’ ‘‘is eaten,’’ and ‘‘has an
outer layer ofskin or peel,’’ which were mentioned by other subjects as being critical
features. Hampton derived a list of necessary features for each category, by includ-
ing the listed features that were found in all the category members. For example, all
the items that his subjects identified as fruit had the feature ‘‘is eaten,’’ and so this
Typicality and the Classical View of Categories 25
was a necessary feature. The question he next asked was whether these features
were defining: Ifan item had all these features, would it be in the category? The
answer is no. He found many cases of items that had all of these necessary features
but were not considered to be category members. For example, cucumbers and garlic
had all of the necessary features for fruit but were not considered to be category
members. This, then, is another failure to find defining features of actual categories.
Furthermore, Hampton found that when he simply counted up how many relevant
features each item had (not just the necessary features, but all of them), he could
predict how likely people were to include the item as a category member. But since all
members would be expected to have the defining features (according to the revised
classical view), the number ofother features should not predict category member-
ship. Thus, nondefining features are important in deciding category membership—
not just core features.
In more recent work, Hampton (1988b, 1995) has examined the relationship be-
tween typicality measures and category membership judgments. According to the
revised classical view, typicality is not truly related to category membership but
simply reflects identification procedures. So extremely atypical items like whales or
penguins are just as much mammals and birds, respectively, as typical examples are
(Armstrong et al. 1983; Osherson and Smith 1981). However, Hampton’s results in
a number ofdomains show that typicality ratings are the best predictor ofuntimed
category judgments, the ones that should only involve the core. These results appear
to directly contradict the revised classical view.
One reason for the popularity of the classical view has been its ties to traditional
logic (Inhelder and Piaget 1964). For example, how does one evaluate sentences of
the sort ‘‘All dogs are animals’’ or ‘‘Coach is a dog and a pet’’? Propositional logic
tells us that ‘‘Coach is a dog and a pet’’ is true if‘‘Coach is a dog’’ and ‘‘Coach is a
pet’’ are both true. This can be easily accommodated in the classical view by the
argument that ‘‘Coach is a dog and a pet’’ is true ifCoach has the necessary and
sufficient features of both dogs and pets. Surprisingly, there is empirical evidence
suggesting that people do not follow this rule. Hampton (1988b) found that people
are willing to call something a member ofa conjunctive category (X AND Y) even if
it is not in both components (X, Y). For example, subjects believe that chess is in the
category sports that are also games, but they do not believe that it is a sport. So,
chess seems to fulfill the definition for sport in one context but not in another. He
also found (Hampton 1997) that subjects believed that tree houses are in the cate-
gory ofdwellings that are not buildings, but they also believe them to be buildings.
So, on different occasions, people say that it does and does not have the defining
26Chapter 2
features of buildings. Although very troublesome for the classical view, these exam-
ples have a very natural explanation on other views, as is explained in chapter 12.
A related advantage that has been proposed for the classical view is that it has a
very natural way ofexplaining how categories can be hierarchically ordered. By this
I mean that categories can form nested sets in which each category includes the ones
‘‘below’’ it. For example, a single object could be called Coach (his name), a yellow
labrador retriever, a labrador retriever, a retriever, a dog, a mammal, a vertebrate,
and an animal. These particular categories are significant because all yellow labs are
dogs, all dogs are mammals, all vertebrates are animals, and so on. As we will see in
chapter 7, this aspect ofcategories has been thought to be quite significant. The
classical view points out that ifall X are Y, then the definition of Y must be included
in the definition of X. For example, all red triangles are triangles. Therefore, red
triangles must be closed, three-sided figures, because this is the definition ofa triangle.
Similarly, whatever the definition oflabradors is, that must be included in the defi-
nition ofyellow labs, because all yellow labs are labradors. This rule ensures that
category membership is transitive. Ifall As are Bs, and all Bs are Cs, then all As
must be Cs. Since the definition of C must be included in B (because all Bs are Cs),
and the definition of B must be included in A (because all As are Bs), the definition
of C must thereby be included in A. The nesting ofdefinitions provides a way of
explaining how categories form hierarchies.
Hampton (1982) suspected that there might be failures of transitivity, which
would pose a significant problem for the classical view. He asked subjects to decide
whether items were members oftwo categories—one ofthem a subset ofthe other.
For example, subjects decided whether an armchair is a chair and whether it is fur-
niture. They also had to judge whether chairs are furniture (they are). Hampton
found a number ofcases in which an item was judged to be a member ofthe subset
category but not the higher category—that is, examples ofchairs that were not
thought to be furniture. For instance, subjects judged that chairs were furniture and
that a car seat was a chair; however, they usually denied that a car seat was furni-
ture. But ifa car seat has the defining features ofchairs, and chairs have the defining
features of furniture, then car seat must have the defining features of furniture. It
should be pointed out that Hampton’s task was not a speeded, perceptual judgment,
but a more leisurely decision about category membership, which is just the sort of
judgment that should involve the concept core. It is puzzling to the revised classical
view that even such judgments do not show the use ofdefinitions in the way that
is expected. However, we will see later that this kind ofintransitivity is easily ex-
plained by other views.
Typicality and the Classical View of Categories 27
Finally, a theoretical problem with the revised classical view is that the concept
core does not in general appear to be an important part ofthe concept, in spite ofits
name and theoretical intention as representing the ‘‘real’’ concept. As mentioned
earlier, almost every conceptual task has shown that there are unclear examples and
variation in typicality ofcategory members. Because the concept core does not allow
such variation, all these tasks must be explained primarily by reference to the iden-
tification procedure and characteristic features. So, if it takes longer to verify that a
chicken is a bird than that a bluejay is a bird, this cannot be explained by the con-
cept core, since chicken and bluejay equally possess the core properties ofbirds,
according to this view. Instead, chicken and bluejays differ in characteristic features,
such as their size and ability to fly. Thus, speeded judgments must not be relying on
the category core. When this reasoning is applied to all the tasks that show such
typicality effects, including category learning, speeded and unspeeded catego-
rization, rating tasks, language production and comprehension, vocabulary learn-
ing, and category-based induction, the concept core is simply not explaining most of
the data. As a result, most researchers have argued that the concept core can simply
be done away with, without any loss in the ability to explain the results (see espe-
cially Hampton 1979, 1982, 1995).
Summary of Typicality as a Phenomenon
Before going on to the more recent theoretical accounts of typicality phenomena, it is
useful to discuss these phenomena in a theory-neutral way. Somewhat confusingly,
the phenomena are often referred to as revealing a prototype structure to concepts.
(This is confusing, because there is a prototype theory that is a particular theory of
these results, so sometimes prototype refers to the phenomenon and sometimes the
specific theory. This is not an isolated case ofterminological confusion in the field,
as you will see.) A prototype is the best example ofa category. One can think of
category members, then, arranged in order of‘‘goodness,’’ in which the things that
are very similar to the prototype are thought ofas being very typical or good mem-
bers, and things that are not very similar as being less typical or good members
(Rosch 1975).
One way to illustrate this concept concretely is by the dot-pattern studies ofPos-
ner and Keele (1968, 1970), since it is very clear what the prototype is in their
experiments. (Also, these are historically important experiments that are ofinterest
in their own right.) Posner and Keele first generated a pattern ofrandomly posi-
tioned dots (see figure 2.2a) as the category prototype. From this pattern, they made that items are typical when they have high family resemblance with members ofthe
category: ‘‘. . . members ofa category come to be viewed as prototypical ofthe cate-
gory as a whole in proportion to the extent to which they bear a family resem-
blance to (have attributes which overlap those of) other members of the category.
Conversely, items viewed as most prototypical ofone category will be those with
least family resemblance to or membership in other categories’’ (p. 575). 3 That is,
typical items (1) tend to have the properties ofother category members but (2) tend
not to have properties ofcategory nonmembers. For example, an oriole is ofthe
same size as many birds, perches in trees, ﬂies (common bird behaviors), has two
wings (universal among birds), and so on. Therefore, even though orioles are not
very frequent in my experience, I can recognize them as typical birds because they
have frequent bird properties. In contrast, chickens, which I see much more often,
are large for birds, white (not a very usual color), do not ﬂy (not common among
birds), are eaten (not common), and so on. So, even though chickens themselves are
fairly common, their properties are not very common as properties for birds, and so
they are atypical birds.
Rosch and Mervis (1975) supported this claim in a number ofways. Because their
study is so important, I will discuss it in some detail. First, they examined a number
ofdifferent natural categories 4 to see ifthey could predict which items would be
typical or atypical. Rosch and Mervis selected twenty members ofsix general cate-
gories. Two examples are shown in table 2.1. They had subjects rate each item for
how typical it was ofits category, and that is reﬂected in table 2.1 in the order
the items are listed (e.g., chair is the most typical furniture, and telephone the least
typical). Then Rosch and Mervis had new subjects list the attributes ofeach ofthe
items. The question was whether typical items would have more ofthe common
attributes than would atypical items. However, there is a problem with just listing
attributes, which is that people are not always very good at spontaneously produc-
ing attributes for items. If you were to look at such data, you would see that some
subjects have produced an attribute for an item, but others have not. Is this because
the latter just forgot, or weren’t as careful in doing the task? In some cases, that
seems likely. Furthermore, it is often the case that attributes listed for one item seem
to be equally true for another item, for which it was not listed. For example, people
might list ‘‘has four legs’’ for chair but not for bed. Because of this kind of problem
(see Tversky and Hemenway 1984 for discussion), Rosch and Mervis asked judges
to go through the list ofattributes and to decide whether the attributes were true of
all the items. So, if some subjects listed ‘‘has four legs’’ for chairs, the judges would
decide whether it was also true for the other items of furniture. The judges also elimi-
32 Chapter 2
nated any features that were clearly and obviously incorrect. This judge-amending
process is now a standard technique for processing attribute-listing data.
Finally, Rosch and Mervis weighted each attribute by how many items it occurred
in. If ‘‘has four legs’’ occurred in ten examples of furniture, it would have a weight
of10; if‘‘is soft’’ occurred in only two examples, it would receive a weight of2.
Finally, they added up these scores for each feature listed for an item. So, if chair
had eighteen features listed, its score would be the sum of the weights of those
eighteen features. This technique results in the items with the most common features
in the category having the highest scores. Rosch and Mervis found that this fea-
ture score was highly predictive oftypicality (correlations for individual categories
ranged from .84 to .91). That is, the items that were most typical had features that
were very common in the category. The less typical items had different features. This
result has been replicated by Malt and Smith (1984). Rosch and Mervis illustrated
this in a clever way by looking at the ﬁve most typical items and ﬁve least typical
items in each category and counting how many features they each had in common.
Table 2.1.
Examples ofitems studied by Rosch and Mervis (1975), ordered by typicality.
Furniture Fruit
chair orange
sofa apple
table banana
dresser peach
desk pear
bed apricot
bookcase plum
footstool grapes
lamp strawberry
piano grapefruit
cushion pineapple
mirror blueberry
rug lemon
radio watermelon
stove honeydew
clock pomegranate
picture date
closet coconut
vase tomato
telephone olive
Typicality and the Classical View of Categories 33
They found that the ﬁve most typical examples of furniture (chair, sofa, table,
dresser, and desk) had thirteen attributes in common. In contrast, the ﬁve least typical
examples (clock, picture, closet, vase, and telephone) had only two attributes in
common. For fruit, the ﬁve most typical items had sixteen attributes in common, but
the least typical ones had absolutely no attributes in common.
This result gives evidence for the ﬁrst part of the family-resemblance hypothesis,
but what about the second part, that typical items will not have features that are
found in other categories? This turns out to be much more difﬁcult to test, because
one would have to ﬁnd out the attributes not just ofthe target categories (say, fruit
and furniture), but also of all other related categories, so that one could see which
items have features from those categories. For example, if olives are less typical fruit
because they are salty, we need to know ifsaltiness is a typical attribute ofother
categories, and so we would need to get feature listings of other categories like veg-
etables, meats, desserts, grains, and so on, which would be an enormous amount of
work. (IfI have not made it clear yet, attribute listings are very time-consuming and
labor-intensive to collect, as individual subjects can list features of only so many
concepts, all ofwhich then must be transcribed, collated, and judge-amended by
new subjects.) So, this aspect ofthe hypothesis is not so easy to test. Nonetheless,
Rosch and Mervis were able to test it for two more speciﬁc categories (chair and car,
Experiment 4), and they found evidence for this hypothesis too. That is, the more
often an item had features from a different category, the less typical it was (correla-
tions of :67 and :86).
Both ofthese studies are correlational. Like most studies ofnatural categories, the
underlying variables that were thought to be responsible for the phenomenon (typi-
cality) were simply observed in the items—the researchers did not manipulate them.
As is well known, this leads to the correlation-causation problem, in which there
could be some other variable that was not directly measured but was actually re-
sponsible for the typicality. Perhaps the most typical items were more familiar, or
pleasant, or . . . (add your favorite confounding variable). Thus, Rosch and Mervis
(1975) also performed experimental studies of family resemblance that were not
subject to this problem. They used lists ofalphanumeric strings for items, such as
GKNTJ and 8SJ3G. Each string was an exemplar, and subjects had to learn to place
each exemplar into one oftwo categories. The exemplars were constructed so that
some items had more common features (within the category) than others. Rosch and
Mervis found that the items with higher family-resemblance scores were learned
sooner and were rated as more typical than were items with lower scores. For these
34 Chapter 2
artiﬁcial stimuli, there is little question ofother variables that might explain away
the results for natural stimuli. In a ﬁnal experiment, Rosch and Mervis varied
the amount ofoverlap ofan item’s features with the contrast category. So, one item
had only features that occurred in Category 1; another item had four features
that occurred in Category 1, and one that occurred in Category 2; a different item
had three features that occurred in Category 1, and two that occurred in Cate-
gory 2; and so on. They found that the items with greater overlap with the other
category were harder to learn and were rated as much less typical after the learning
phase.
In summary, Rosch and Mervis’s (1975) study provided evidence for their family-
resemblance hypothesis that items are typical (1) ifthey have features common in
their category and (2) do not have features common to other categories. Unfortu-
nately, there is some confusion in the ﬁeld over the term ‘‘family resemblance.’’ I
have been using it here as indicating both parts ofRosch and Mervis’s hypothesis.
However, other writers sometimes refer to ‘‘family resemblance’’ as being only the
within-category component (1 above). 5 In fact, the between-category aspect is often
ignored in descriptions ofthis view. It is important to note, though, that what-
ever name one uses, it is both having features common within a category and the
lack offeatures overlapping other categories that determine typicality according to
this view, and Rosch and Mervis provided support for both variables inﬂuencing
typicality.
This view ofwhat makes items typical has stood the test oftime well. The major
addition to it was made by Barsalou (1985), who did a more complex study ofwhat
determines typicality in natural categories. Using most ofthe same categories that
Rosch and Mervis did, such as vehicles, clothing, birds, and fruit, Barsalou measured
three variables. Central tendency was, roughly speaking, the family-resemblance
idea ofRosch and Mervis, though only including within-category resemblance. The
items that were most similar to other items in the category had the highest central
tendency scores. Frequency of instantiation was the frequency with which an item
occurred as a member ofthe category, as assessed by subjects’ ratings. Barsalou felt
that the simple frequency of an item (e.g., chicken vs. lark) was probably not as
important as how often an item was thought of as being a member of the category,
and frequency of instantiation measured this. Ideals was the degree to which each
item ﬁt the primary goal ofeach category. Here, Barsalou selected, based on his
own intuitions, a dimension that seemed critical to each category. For example, for
the category ofvehicle, the dimension was how efﬁcient it was for transportation.
Typicality and the Classical View of Categories 35
Subjects rated the items on these dimensions and also rated the typicality ofeach
item to its category. The results, then, were the correlations between these different
measures and each item’s typicality.
Barsalou’s results provided evidence for all three variables. Indeed, when he sta-
tistically controlled for any two of the variables (using a partial correlation), the
remaining variable was still signiﬁcant. Strongest was the central tendency measure.
The items that were most similar to other category members were most typical—the
partial correlation was .71. This is not surprising, given Rosch and Mervis’s results.
More surprising was the reliable effect of frequency of instantiation (partial cor-
relation of.36). Consistent with Mervis et al. (1976), Barsalou found that the pure
frequency of any item (e.g., the familiarity of chicken and lark) did not predict typi-
cality. However, the frequency with which an item occurred as a category member
did predict typicality. This suggests that thinking ofan item as being a category
member increases its typicality, perhaps through an associative learning process
(though see below).
Finally, the effect ofideals was also signiﬁcant (partial correlation of.45). For
example, the most typical vehicles were the ones that were considered efﬁcient
means oftransportation, and the most typical fruit were those that people liked (to
eat). This effect is not very consistent with the Rosch and Mervis proposal, since it
does not have to do with the relation ofthe item to other category members, but
with the relation ofthe item to some more abstract function or goal. Barsalou
(1985) presented the results for each category separately, and an examination of the
results shows that ideals were quite effective predictors for artifact categories like
vehicles, clothing and weapons, but less so for natural kinds like birds, fruit and
vegetables. 6 As Barsalou himselfnotes, since he only used one ideal per category,
and since he derived them based on his own intuitions, it is possible that ideals are
even more important than his results reveal. Ifmore comprehensive testing for the
best ideals had been done, they might have accounted for even more of the typicality
ratings. Indeed, a recent study by Lynch, Coley, and Medin (2000) found that tree
experts’ judgments oftypicality were predicted by ideal dimensions of‘‘weediness’’
and height, but not by the similarity ofthe trees. Weediness refers to an aesthetic
and functional dimension of how useful trees are for landscaping. Strong, healthy,
good-looking trees are typical based on this factor. The importance of height is not
entirely clear; it may also be aesthetic, or it may be related to family resemblance, in
that trees are taller than most plants, and so tall trees are more typical. Surprisingly,
the variable ofcentrality—that is, similarity to other trees (Rosch and Mervis’s
1975 ﬁrst factor)—did not predict typicality above and beyond these two factors.
36Chapter 2
These results suggest the need for further exploring how important ideals are rela-
tive to family resemblance in general.
The importance ofideals in determining typicality is that they suggest that the
category’s place in some broader knowledge structure could be important. That is,
people don’t just learn that tools are things like hammers, saws, and planes, but they
also use more general knowledge about what tools are used for and why we have
them in order to represent the category. Category members that best serve those
functions may be seen as more typical, above and beyond the speciﬁc features they
share with other members.
As mentioned above, correlational studies ofthis sort, although important to
carry out, can have the problem ofunclear causal connections. In this case, the fre-
quency ofinstantiation variable has a problem ofinterpreting the directionality of
the causation. Is it that frequently thinking of something as being a category mem-
ber makes it more typical? Or is it that more typical things are likely to be thought
ofas being category members? Indeed, the second possibility seems more likely to
me. For example, Barsalou found that typical items are more likely to be generated
ﬁrst when people think ofa category. When people think ofexamples ofweapons,
for example, they hardly ever start with spears or guard dogs; they are more likely
to start with typical items like guns and knives. Frequency ofinstantiation, then,
could well be an effect ofthe typicality ofitems, rather than vice versa. Similarly, the
effect of ideals might also have come after the category’s typicality was determined.
That is, perhaps the ideal ofvehicles came about (or occurred to Barsalou) as a re-
sult ofthinking about typical vehicles and what their purposes were. It is not clear
which is the chicken and which is the egg.
Barsalou addressed this problem in an experimental study ofthe importance of
ideals. He taught subjects new categories ofkinds ofpeople. Subjects in one cate-
gory tended to jog (though at different frequencies), and subjects in another tended
to read the newspaper (at different frequencies). Barsalou told subjects that the two
categories were either physical education teachers and current events teachers, or
else that they were teachers ofcomputer programming languages Q or Z. His idea
was that the joggers would tend to be perceived as fulﬁlling an ideal dimension
(physical ﬁtness) when the category was physical education teachers but not when
the category was teachers oflanguage Q; similarly, the newspaper readers would ﬁt
an ideal (being informed) when they were current events teachers but not when they
were teachers oflanguage Z. And indeed, amount ofjogging inﬂuenced typicality
ratings for the categories described as physical education teachers, but not for the
category labeled teachers oflanguage Q even though both categories had the exact
Typicality and the Classical View of Categories 37
same learning items. That is, the family-resemblance structures of the items were
identical—what varied was which ideal was evoked.
This experiment, then, conﬁrms part ofthe correlational study that Barsalou
(1985) reported for natural categories. Ideals are important for determining typi-
cality above and beyond any effects of family resemblance. A number of later studies
have replicated this kind ofresult, and are discussed in chapter 6 (Murphy and
Allopenna 1994; Spalding and Murphy 1996; Wattenmaker et al. 1986; Wisniewski
1995). Studies ofexperts have found even more evidence ofthe use ofideals
(Medin, Lynch, Coley, and Atran 1997; Profﬁtt, Coley, and Medin 2000).
These studies do not show that family resemblance is not a determinant of typi-
cality, but that there are also other determinants that Rosch and Mervis (1975)
would not have predicted. Thus, I am not suggesting that their view is incorrect but
that it is only a partial story, for some categories at least. They are clearly correct,
however, in saying that frequency in and of itself does not account for typicality to
any great degree (see also Malt and Smith 1982). Whether frequency of instantia-
tion is an important variable is less clear. Barsalou’s results do give evidence for its
being related to typicality. However, since this variable has not been experimentally
tested, the result is subject to the counterargument raised above, that it is a function
oftypicality rather than vice versa. This, therefore, is still an open issue.
End of the Classical View?
The classical view appears only very sporadically after this point in the book. To a
considerable degree, it has simply ceased to be a serious contender in the psychology
ofconcepts. The reasons, described at length above, can be summarized as follows.
First, it has been extremely difﬁcult to ﬁnd deﬁnitions for most natural categories,
and even harder to ﬁnd deﬁnitions that are plausible psychological representations
that people ofall ages would be likely to use. Second, the phenomena oftypicality
and unclear membership are both unpredicted by the classical view. It must be
augmented with other assumptions—which are exactly the assumptions ofthe
nonclassical theories—to explain these things. Third, the existence ofintransitive
category decisions (car seats are chairs; chairs are furniture; but car seats are not
furniture) is very difﬁcult to explain on the classical view. The classical view has not
predicted many other phenomena ofconsiderable interest in the ﬁeld, which we will
be discussing in later chapters, such as exemplar effects, base rate neglect, the exis-
tence ofa basic level ofcategorization, the order in which children acquire words,
and so on. In some cases, it is very difﬁcult to see how to adapt this view to be
consistent with those effects.
38 Chapter 2
In summary, the classical core has very little to do, as most ofthe interesting and
robust effects in the ﬁeld cannot be explained by cores but must refer to the charac-
teristic features. This is true not only for speeded judgments, but even for careful
categorizations done without time constraints.
In spite ofall this, there have been a number ofattempts to revive the classical
view in theoretical articles, sometimes written by philosophers rather than by psy-
chologists (Armstrong et al. 1983; Rey 1983; Sutcliffe 1993). This is a bit difﬁcult to
explain, because the view simply does not predict the main phenomena in the ﬁeld,
even ifit can be augmented and changed in various ways to be more consistent with
them (as discussed in the core-plus-identiﬁcation procedure idea). Why are writers
so interested in saving it? To some degree, I believe that it is for historical reasons.
After all, this is a view that has a long history in psychology, and in fact has been
part ofWestern thinking since Aristotle. (Aristotle!) Ifthis were a theory that you or
I had made up, it would not have continued to receive this attention after the ﬁrst 10
or 20 experiments showing it was wrong. But our theory would not have this his-
tory behind it. Another reason is that there is a beauty and simplicity in the classical
view that succeeding theories do not have. It is consistent with the law ofexcluded
middle and other traditional rules oflogic beloved ofphilosophers. To be able to
identify concepts through deﬁnitions of sufﬁcient and necessary properties is an ele-
gant way ofcategorizing the world, and it avoids a lot ofsloppiness that comes
about through prototype concepts (like the intransitive category decisions, and un-
clear members). Unfortunately, the world appears to be a sloppy place.
A ﬁnal reason that these revivals ofthe classical view are attempted is, I believe,
because the proponents usually do not attempt to explain a wide range ofempirical
data. The emphasis on philosophical concerns is related to this. Most ofthese writers
are not starting from data and trying to explain them but are instead starting from a
theoretical position that requires classical concepts and then are trying to address
the psychological criticisms ofit. 7 In fact, much of the support such writers give for
the classical view is simply criticism ofthe evidence against it. For example, it has
been argued that typicality is not necessarily inconsistent with a classical concept for
various reasons, or that our inability to think ofdeﬁnitions is not really a problem.
However, even ifthese arguments were true (and I don’t think they are), this is a far
cry from actually explaining the evidence. A theory should not be held just because
the criticisms ofit can be argued against—the theory must itselfprovide a compel-
ling account ofthe data. People who held the classical view in 1972 certainly did not
predict the results ofRips et al. (1973), Rosch (1975), Rosch and Mervis (1975),
Hampton (1979, 1988b, or 1995), or any ofthe other experiments that helped to
Typicality and the Classical View of Categories 39
overturn it. It was only after such data were well established that classical theorists
proposed reasons for why these results might not pose problems for an updated
classical view.
As I mentioned earlier, there is no speciﬁc theory ofconcept representation that
is based on the classical view at the time ofthis writing, even though there are a
number ofwriters who profess to believe in this view. The most popular theories of
concepts are based on prototype or exemplar theories that are strongly unclassical.
Until there is a more concrete proposal that is ‘‘classical’’ and that can positively
explain a wide variety ofevidence oftypicality effects (rather than simply criticize
the arguments against it), we must conclude that this theory is not a contender.
Thus, although it pops up again from time to time, I will not be evaluating it in
detail in the remainder ofthis book.
