I assume we can all agree that language is one part of the
answer. Ristau qualiﬁes this assumption with the obser-
vation that other animals also have calls with referential
content. Therefore, this aspect of language cannot dis-
tinguish us from other animals. But clearly no nonhuman
animal has a system of external symbols with the proper-
ties of human language. TOOC details the role that
language plays in Quinian bootstrapping, which in turn
plays a role in the expansion of our representational
repertoire.
R3.4. Number representations
Commentators Landy, Allen, & Anderson (Landy
et al.) argue that number representations are neither
modular nor domain speciﬁc, because they proﬂigately
draw on representations of space. These commentators
review many fascinating phenomena that show that
numerical representations share computational machinery
with spatial ones. The question then arises, for each,
whether it reﬂects mappings between the domains that
occur in evolutionary or ontogenetic time.
I agree that computational machinery is recycled over
evolutionary time, and that systems that evolved under
selection pressures for spatial representations were later
drawn upon for other purposes, including numerical rep-
resentations. The worked-out example in TOOC is that of
AM representations, which are used in representing many
different dimensions of experience (brightness, loudness,
duration, length, area) in addition to representing cardinal
values of sets; there is even evidence of a common neural
substrate for several of these representational systems
(Walsh 2003). But these facts do not undermine the
claim of innate, domain-speciﬁc number representations,
as long as the infant does not confuse mental symbols
for number with symbols for other dimensions of experi-
ence (which infants do not), and as long as the numerical
symbols have a further innate numerical conceptual role,
as is the case. The domain speciﬁcity in question here
concerns content, not the nature of (or even the neural
substrate of) the computational machinery.
Landy et al. endorse TOOC’s claim that conceptual
discontinuity in the course of ontogenesis also involves
recycling old representations and computational capacities
in new domains. Quinian bootstrapping is a speciﬁc propo-
sal for one way that this is actually accomplished. Such
ontogenetic recycling also does not undermine the
domain-speciﬁcity of innate systems of core number
cognition.
R4. On the possibility and extent of conceptual
discontinuity
The commentaries express two incompatible sentiments
with respect to conceptual discontinuity. Some deny it
(Rips & Hespos) and some say it is much more
common and comes in many more varieties than is
suggested in TOOC (Gopnik, Margolis & Laurence,
Weiskopf). I am persuaded by the commentaries that
express the second sentiment.
Theories of conceptual development face two explana-
tory challenges: specifying how cognitive development is
possible, and specifying why, in some cases, it is so hard.
The second half of TOOC concerns some of the hard
cases, where years of input is mis-analyzed, and the
target conceptual system is sometimes never grasped.
There are many reasons conceptual development might
be slow (including lack of access to relevant input), and
one of them is that mastering the target system of rep-
resentation requires building a representational system
that is discontinuous with its input. In each case study
TOOC characterizes the two successive conceptual
systems, CS1 and CS2, specifying the senses in which
CS2 is discontinuous with CS1 – having more expressive
power, being incommensurable, or both.
Clearly, if we learn or construct new representational
resources, we must draw on those we already have.
Rips & Hespos characterize discontinuity as involving
the construction of “entirely new systems” of concepts.
This is true in some sense. Discontinuities involve cre-
ation of new representational primitives and new
systems of concepts articulated in terms of those primi-
tives. For example, the concepts, weight, density,
volume, and matter are interdeﬁned and acquired en
suite, as are the concepts fraction and division. But the
bootstrapping processes that explain how new represen-
tational resources are constructed do draw on already
existing representational resources. In that sense they
are not “entirely new.” Nonetheless, in cases of disconti-
nuity, CS2 cannot be translated into the language of the
CS1, and therefore cannot be learned by testing hypoth-
eses stated in that language.
TOOC explicitly discusses the challenge Rips &
Hespos offer to the very possibility of incommensurabilty.
As Rips & Hespos put it, if bootstrapping is possible, then
it must be possible to characterize a function from CS1 to
CS2, and hence to translate between CS1 and CS2. The
key issues here are what that function is, and whether it
counts as a “translation” (Kuhn 1982). To translate is to
express a proposition stated in the language of CS2 in
the language one already has (CS1), as in translating “Je
suis heureux” into “I am happy.” In cases of discontinuity
in which Quinian bootstrapping is required, this is imposs-
ible. Bootstrapping is not translation; what is involved is
language construction, not translation. That is, drawing
on resources from within CS1 and elsewhere, one con-
structs an incommensurable CS2 that is not translatable
into CS1.
Margolis & Laurence and Weiskopf point out that in
addition to Quinian bootstrapping, there are also atomistic
processes that create new representational primitives,
Weiskopf (2008) makes a convincing case that these ato-
mistic processes also result in increases of expressive
power. I agree, and I also agree that what Weiskopf calls
“coining” is always involved in the creation of new rep-
resentational primitives. Discontinuities come in many
different ﬂavors, however, and I stand by my thesis that
those that require bootstrapping are an important class.
According to the analysis of Laurence and Margolis
(2002), adding a new natural kind concept to one’s reper-
toire depends upon the prior existence of a natural kind
schema with the content “same natural kind as x” and
ﬁlling in x with a kind syndrome (a prototype, a theory)
for the kind x. This is clearly a different process than learn-
ing that a quark is a new kind of subatomic particle, if one
does not currently have the capacity to entertain thoughts
about subatomic particles. It is this latter type of
Response/Carey: Pre´ cis of The Origin of Concepts
BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (2011) 34:3 157
discontinuity, that which requires Quinian bootstrapping,
that is my focus in TOOC.
R5. On bootstrapping
R5.1. Bootstrapping in general
Commentators Haman & Hernik emphasize that there is
genuine conceptual development that does not require
creation of new representational primitives, and that
there are bootstrapping processes short of Quinian boot-
strapping. I agree, and TOOC discusses syntactic and
semantic bootstrapping processes in language acquisition
as examples of bootstrapping processes that do not result
in the creation of new representational primitives.
Abstractly, all bootstrapping involves using mappings
between different representations in the service of extend-
ing them in some speciﬁable way. Haman & Hernik’s pro-
posal for the creation of new object kind representations,
drawing on core cognition of objects, causal/functional
analysis, and the capacity to create long-term memory
symbols would be a bootstrapping process by this charac-
terization (and is essentially what I propose as well in Ch. 7
of TOOC). My account of the creation of long-term
memory models of small sets of individuals that support
the meanings of “one,” “two,” “three,” and “four” in the
subset-knower stage is another bootstrapping process.
Working out exactly how such processes work is an impor-
tant project in the ﬁeld of cognitive development. But one
major thrust of TOOC is that there are episodes of concep-
tual development that require more.
R5.2. Must the placeholder structure be articulated in
public symbols?
Placeholder structures consisting of semantically impover-
ished symbols are the key to how Quinian bootstrapping
differs from the bootstrapping processes involved in the
episodes of learning described in section 5.1. The place-
holder symbols gain whatever initial meaning they have
from their relations to each other. Several commentators
(Allen & Bickhard, Heintz, Weiskopf) wonder why it
is important that the placeholder structure be encoded
in the external public symbols of language, mathematical
symbols, diagrams, and the like.
Allen & Bickhard make use of the possibility that pla-
ceholders may be mental symbols to counter my argument
for innate representational primitives. They suggest that
infants might create a whole suite of interrelated new
mental symbols, the content of each being exhausted by
its role in the mental structure. By hypothesis, none is con-
structed from already existing concepts. I agree that this is
a logical possibility, but what would ever lead an infant to
do this?
Encountering a new external symbol from others’ use of
it (e.g., ﬁrst hearing the word “mass” in the context of the
sentence “force equals mass times acceleration,” or “two”
in the context of the count routine) is often the impetus
for an individual’s coining a new mental symbol. As
Weiskopf points out, this is not the only impetus to
create a new symbol in the language of thought. I agree
with these commentators that from the point of view of
how Quinian bootstrapping generates new represen-
tational resources, it is not necessary that the symbols be
public. It is certainly logically possible that a whole place-
holder structure of interrelated empty symbols could be
generated in the language of thought and used to model
other domains of representations that already have wide
content. As I said, the question is what might lead this to
happen. Before I can even begin to evaluate this possi-
bility, I would need to see a plausible worked example.
In all of the case studies of Quinian bootstrapping in
TOOC, the placeholder structures were external
symbols, probably for several reasons. As emphasized by
Heintz, conceptual change is a social process, fueled by
communication. But appeals to communication, even
with its assumptions of relevance, will not do all the
work we need here, for what is at issue is how listeners
construct the representational resources to understand
what is being communicated. The role of placeholder
structures in conceptual change may also depend upon
their being public. Some public symbols may be easier
to think with. Maxwell explained that he used diagram-
matic models that he knew captured the mathematics of
Newtonian forces in a ﬂuid medium (his placeholder
structure) in his modeling of the empirical phenomena
involving electricity and magnetism in exactly this way:
that they are easier to think with (see Nersessian 1992).
Finally, the modeling processes involved in conceptual
change unfold over years, and the placeholder structures
need to be stable; external symbols may facilitate that.
Although conceptual change is a social process, its ﬁrst
step, contrary to Weiskopf, is not always learning from
others a set of new symbols and their interrelations. This
is usually so in development, but obviously never so in
the bootstrapping episodes in cultural history (see Ch.
11 of TOOC). In the case of Maxwell, an abductive
guess led him to explore the hypothesis that the forces at
work in electromagnetic phenomena were similar to the
Newtonian forces in a ﬂuid medium. That is, nobody
was using the language of electromagnetic theory; its
theoretical terms and equations were the output of the
bootstrapping episode. In the case of historical bootstrap-
ping, the placeholders derive from conceptual structures
created in other contexts and seen to be relevant to the
domain at hand through an abductive leap.
R5.3. The prehistory of number representations
Commentators Overmann, Wynn, & Coolidge (Over-
mann et al.) consider the construction of explicit rep-
resentations of natural number in cultural history. They
assume, and I agree, that external tally systems (lines on
clay tablets, notches on sticks), which are widespread
both in the archeological and in the ethnographic
records, were the ﬁrst step in the process. Such external
symbol systems constitute an example of “extended cogni-
tion,” in which external objects take on symbolic functions.
Note also that tally systems represent number as does
parallel individuation, with the external tallies making up
for the limits on working memory. That is, each tally
stands in one-to-one correspondence with an individual
in the set, such that the set of tallies as a whole represents
the cardinality of the set. Overmann et al. speculate that
strung beads, which go back in the archeological record
for 100,000 years, may have been an artifact co-opted for
this use.
Response/Carey: Pre´ cis of The Origin of Concepts
158 BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (2011) 34:3
This may be, but is there any evidence that beads were
ever used as external tallies? If so, understanding the
invention of tally systems would involve understanding
how people came to the insight that beads could serve
this symbolic function, rather than decorative uses, or as
markers of wealth, or myriad others. That is, the avail-
ability of an artifact that could serve as the medium of a
tally system doesn’t explain how it came to be one. Now
that we are in the realm of speculation, I believe, contra
Overmann et al., that body counting systems could well
also play an extended cognition role in the cultural con-
struction of integer representations. Bodies, before
beads, may have been the basis of the ﬁrst tally systems.
Beads may go back 100,000 years, but ﬁngers go back
millions, and ﬁnger tally systems are also widely attested
in the ethnographic literature. But even so, the question
then becomes how the insight arose that ﬁngers could be
used in a tally system based on one-to-one
correspondence.
R5.4. Acquiring representations of natural number
Commentators Gelman, Gentner & Simms, and Spelke
engaged the fundamental issues concerning conceptual
discontinuities in and bootstrapping of natural number
representations. These debates might be hard to follow
for those not steeped in the dialog, so here I will try to
bring out the main issues.
Gelman’s and my disagreements coexist within broad
agreement on the big theoretical picture, and all of my
work on number starts with hers. There are two major dis-
agreements: (1) She presupposes that there is only one
innate nonverbal representational system that plays a
role in the extended developmental process we both
endorse (“the inherited. . .”), whereas I believe that there
are other innate resources and that they are more impor-
tant in the initial construction of integer representations;
and (2) I argue that innate number representations are dis-
continuous with representations of natural number,
including verbal numerals deployed in a counting algor-
ithm, whereas she argues that children understand how
counting represents number upon ﬁrst learning how to
count.
Gelman and I agree that AM number representations
are continuous throughout development, support arith-
metic computations, and compute representations of
small sets as well as large ones, both in infancy and adult-
hood (TOOC, Ch. 4). But, contra Gelman, I believe the
parallel individuation system also has a big role to play in
the construction of natural number. This system is also
continuous throughout development, and also has numeri-
cal content, in the form of numerically relevant compu-
tations carried out over models of small sets.
Additionally, there are other representational resources
with innate support that contribute to the construction
of representations of natural number. These include the
logical capacities that underlie the semantics of natural
language, including quantiﬁers. It is clear that the
resources for building the culturally constructed represen-
tations of natural number include much more than those
provided by the AM system. TOOC argues that none of
these three systems of number representation, on their
own, contains representations of natural number (there
are no symbols for any natural numbers, for example) in
any of these systems. Therein lies the discontinuity. In
her recent writings, Gelman acknowledges this; the AM
system contains no representation of exactly one, and is
not built on the successor function (Leslie et al. 2007).
Therefore, AM representations are discontinuous with
the numeral list representation of natural number, which
has both of these properties. In creating a numeral list,
or a symbolic tally system, for that matter, cultures
create a representational system that can express thoughts
and support arithmetic calculations that were not available
to the infant or nonhuman animal, and when individuals
master these culturally created systems, they similarly
extend the expressive power of their representational
repertoire.
The discontinuity at stake in Gelman’s and my debate is
between the numerical concepts expressed by the verbal
count list and those in core cognition. What the child is
creating goes beyond a way of talking about what they
already represent. I stand by the evidence that learning
how counting represents number is extremely difﬁcult,
and by the evidence that children who are cardinal prin-
ciple-knowers are qualitatively different from those that
are not. Much of the data Gelman alludes to in her com-
mentary reﬂect performance by children who already are
cardinal principle-knowers (i.e., many 3-year-olds), and
therefore cannot directly bear on this debate. It would
be very interesting to explore children’s performance on
Zur and Gelman’s intuitive arithmetic tasks, for example,
as a function of knower-level rather than age. Evidence
is mounting that Gelman is right that TOOC underesti-
mates the numerical understanding of children in the
subset-knower stage, For example, before they have
worked out the cardinal principle, some subset-knowers
do know that numerals later in the list refer to larger car-
dinal values than do numerals earlier in the list (e.g., Shus-
terman et al. 2009). How counting represents number is
worked out in small steps during the subset-knower
stage. Still, subsequent work has also conﬁrmed that only
cardinal principle-knowers understand, even if implicitly,
how counting implements the successor function (e.g.,
Sarnecka & Carey 2008; Shusterman et al. 2009). There-
fore, the basic bootstrapping story stands.
Spelke, like Gelman, believes that I have underesti-
mated the role of the AM system of number represen-
tation in the creation of public symbols for natural
number. She offers an alternative bootstrapping proposal,
in which the numerical content in the parallel individua-
tion system is combined with that in the AM system
directly, not in the service of learning verbal numerals.
Notice that we still must explain how children learn the
meanings of verbal numerals and how they learn how
the count list represents number. However, if Spelke’s
bootstrapping process exists, and were to take place
prior to mastering counting, it might support learning to
count.
In Chapter 7 of TOOC I consider two bootstrapping
proposals similar to Spelke’s, although in the service of
mastering counting. One involves mappings between the
count list and AM representations alone, and the other
involves mappings between AM representations, parallel
individuation and the count list. I reject the ﬁrst on the
grounds that AM representations do not contain represen-
tations of “one” or the successor function, and therefore
cannot support the induction that there is ample evidence
Response/Carey: Pre´ cis of The Origin of Concepts
BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (2011) 34:3 159
children make upon becoming cardinal principle –
knowers – namely that two adjacent numerals in the
count list represent sets that differ in cardinal values by
one. The second proposal is very similar to that outlined
in Spelke’s alternative. I note if children had mapped
numerals to AMs and induced the “later in the list,
larger AM” generalization, this could aid in working out
how verbal numerals represent number. I rejected this
proposal on empirical grounds – there was no evidence
that subset-knowers have made this induction, and some
evidence from my own laboratory that they had not
(LeCorre & Carey 2007). However, since then, new evi-
dence has come to light that perhaps they have done so
(e.g., Shusterman et al. 2009). Nonetheless, learning how
counting works requires inducing the relations between
order in the list and the successor function, not only the
relation between order in the AM system and the succes-
sor function. Therefore, I stand by my bootstrapping story
for how children work out how verbal numerals represent
number.
But is it possible that children and animals might create
representations of integers through some process that does
not involve mastering a count list? I am open to that possi-
bility. Tally systems represent exact cardinal values
without counting, but of course, they do not draw on
Spelke’s proposed bootstrapping mechanism. Rather,
they also draw on the representational resources of parallel
individuation. However, I doubt that such a process occurs
in the absence of the construction of some public rep-
resentational system (a tally, a verbal count routine).
First, one would need to specify a context in which such
a mapping would be constructed. Second, one would
need to understand why this construction is not achieved
by humans who do not have a count list or a tally system
in their public symbolic repertoire (e.g., the Piraha˜:
Gordon 2004; Frank et al. 2008; the Munduruku: Pica
et al. 2004; and homesigners: Spaepen et al. 2011.
Finally, although mastering counting requires under-
standing the relation between order in the list and numeri-
cal order, I nowhere claim that children derive
representations of numerical order only from the count
list. Numerical order is implicitly captured in the compu-
tations carried out in the parallel individuation system, and
easily read off from AM representations. Once children
have integrated AM representations with counting, they
can and do use AM representations to support arithmetic
reasoning using symbols. Therefore, I do not disagree with
any of Spelke’s arguments that AM representations
support, even are crucial to, certain adult arithmetic com-
putations. But evidence derived from 5-year-olds and
adults does not bear on the process engaged in by
2-year-olds as they create the ﬁrst public representations
of natural number.
Analogy underlies one of the modeling processes
through which representational resources are combined
during episodes of Quinian bootstrapping. I agree with
Gentner & Simm’s observation that analogy has other
roles to play in conceptual development as well. But I dis-
agree slightly with their characterization of the steps in
mastering verbal numerals. It is true that the child
creates a mapping between sequential order in the
numeral list and ordered quantities, but it is important
to notice that the quantities so modeled (captured in
enriched parallel individuation) are not yet natural
numbers. Gentner discusses the creation of the ﬁrst
natural number representations as a redescription or rere-
presentation of the two parallel relations so that they are
one and the same relations: SUCCESSOR [numeral n,
numeral n þ 1) ! SUCCESSOR (set size n, set size
n þ 1). I doubt whether the 3-year-old child has any rep-
resentation of the successor function that labels the
relation – that is, has any mental symbol successor.
Rather, I would characterize the last step of this particular
bootstrapping episode differently. The order relation in
the numeral list is still merely serial order in a list, but
what the child now has done is analyze “ﬁve, six,
seven. . .” as summary symbols “n, n þ 1” by analogy to
“one, two, three” and “four.” Following up on Gentner
& Simm’s central point, many more bootstrapping epi-
sodes are yet to come before the child will have a full rep-
resentation of natural number and the successor function.
R6. On concepts and concept acquisition,
in general
R6.1. On the theory–theory of narrow content
A commitment to the existence of narrow content requires
distinguishing between those aspects of inferential role
that determine conceptual content and those that do not.
Commentator Keil suggests that evidence concerning
what he calls the degraded nature of our knowledge mili-
tates against the possibility of succeeding at this project, as
well as militating against the theory – theory of concepts.
One thing Keil means by “degraded” is “sketchy.” I
agree that our explanatory theories are sketchy and
sparse in the way Keil’s research has shown us, but this
may be irrelevant to the existence of narrow content if,
as I believe, only a very small part of conceptual role is
content determining. Narrow content does not exhaust a
symbol’s content, which is why we have representations
of entities about which we have the sketchiest of knowl-
edge. There is also wide content; the motivation of the
externalist movement was to explain how we borrow refer-
ence from those from whom we hear a term. The narrow
content of a natural kind symbol like dog, is perhaps
only that it refers to a natural kind, and therefore falls
under the assumptions of psychological essentialism, or
perhaps some placement in a framework theory (e.g.,
that it is a kind of animal, and therefore is constrained
by a skeletal vitalist biology). That we hold contradictory
beliefs about dogs is part of the motivation for this
guess, not a problem for the existence of narrow content.
That is, the existence of contradictory beliefs requires
that we must be able to distinguish concepts from
conceptions, and supports the hypothesis that content-
determining conceptual role is a small part of everything
we know about the entities categorized under our con-
cepts. These considerations apply to metaconceptually
held scientiﬁc theories as well as to intuitive ones: Only
a few relations among concepts distinguish the source-
recipient theory of thermal phenomena from the caloric
theory, although those relations allow separate concepts
of heat and temperature only in the latter case.
Keil raises a very interesting issue not touched upon in
TOOC – how studies of the breakdown of conceptual rep-
resentations with age, disease, brain damage, and the like,
bear on our understanding of the nature of concepts (here
Response/Carey: Pre´ cis of The Origin of Concepts
160 BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (2011) 34:3
“degraded” means damaged). Deborah Zaitchik and col-
leagues (Lombrozo et al. 2007; Zaitchik & Solomon
2008; 2009) have found that patients with Alzheimer’s
disease (AD) resemble preschool children when perform-
ing tasks that diagnose conceptual structure – they make
animistic judgments that the sun, cars, and similar things
are alive, and they demonstrate promiscuous teleology.
These ﬁndings leave open two very different interpret-
ations: (1) AD affects domain general processes that
underlie the participant’s capacity to bring relevant con-
ceptual resources to bear on a given task; and (2) AD
affects the conceptual resources themselves, those that
underlie the knowledge, and perhaps even the concepts,
in the domain. For example, the disease might disrupt
the skeletal inferential structures that constitute a vitalist
biology, such that the participants no longer have a
concept of living things. Gaining a fundamental knowledge
of which interpretation is correct will be important to our
understanding of the nature of concepts, perhaps even
bearing on which aspects of conceptual role are content
determining.
Contrary to commentator Korman’s assumption about
what the theory – theory of concepts comes to, TOOC
nowhere claims that conceptual changes occur only in
the context of formal scientiﬁc development. Rather, the
idea is that there are important commonalities between
the conceptual changes in the history of science and
those that occur in childhood. That is, many questions
about conceptual development receive the same answers
in both cases. These include: how is conceptual change
distinguished from belief revision, what is an “undifferen-
tiated concept,” and what is the role of Quinian bootstrap-
ping in episodes of conceptual change? Korman advocates
the existence of smaller-scale conceptual changes than
those involved in the case studies in TOOC. I am open
to that possibility (see sect. 4). Before I would be able to
evaluate the proposal, I would need to know in what
sense a developmental change is a conceptual change as
opposed to a change in belief. TOOC provides such an
analysis for the conceptual changes in its case studies,
but Korman gives no examples of what kinds of changes
she has in mind.
Although I mention the proposal that the causally
deepest features of a concept are likely to be those that
are content determining, I do not particularly endorse it.
I agree with Korman’s reading of the literature on the
causal status hypothesis concerning categorization
decisions, but I am skeptical about making categorization
decisions the central phenomenon in our exploration of
the nature of concepts. My positive proposal is quite
different; namely that in at least some circumstances
narrow content is determined by the conceptual role
that is exhausted by the placeholder structures in which
new primitives are introduced.
R6.2. On the relations between the philosophers’ and
the psychologists’ approaches to understanding
concepts
Machery’s commentary raises a deep issue on which we
have opposing views. He believes that the traditional cog-
nitive psychologists’ project (understanding categoriz-
ation, inference, conceptual combination) and the
philosopher’s project (understanding reference, truth,
propositional attitudes) are completely distinct, whereas
I do not. My appeals to a part of the philosophical litera-
ture were aimed at sketching some of the arguments for
wide content. I also showed that psychological work sup-
porting psychological essentialism, explanation-based
reasoning, and conceptual development converges with
these arguments. So whereas he and I agree that the
psychological and philosophical literatures emphasize
different phenomena, many philosophers also endorse
that understanding inference, categorization, conceptual
combination, and conceptual development (omitted from
Machery’s list) are part of the explananda of a theory of
concepts. One goal of TOOC was to encourage psycholo-
gists to see that reference, truth, and propositional atti-
tudes are as well. Machery suggests that I endorse
information semantics, while failing to distinguish it from
other approaches to wide content. Instead, TOOC
endorses a dual factor theory and I draw from information
semantics, the causal theory of reference, and other work,
as different approaches to wide content. I distinguish
among them, but do not choose among them.
Machery proposes a solution to the problem of dis-
tinguishing concepts from conceptions. He suggests that
the content-determining aspects of the representations
that underlie categorization and inference are those that
are activated by default, independent of context, whenever
we use a given concept. Insofar as the representational
structures being considered here are prototypes, deﬁ-
nitions, representations of exemplars, and/or intuitive the-
ories, I am deeply skeptical of this proposal. I would bet
dollars to donuts that there are no such default represen-
tations activated independent of context. Indeed, Mach-
ery’s (2009) masterly review of the literature in the
service of his argument that cognitive psychology’s
concept concept is not a natural kind undermines the exist-
ence of such default representations.
R6.3. On the possibility of a dual factor theory of
concepts
I disagree with Rips & Hespos that my version of dual
factor theory collapses to a single factor. I offer general
arguments for wide content, and I assume that the mech-
anisms though which it is determined will be complex and
messy, encompassing aspects of social/causal history, as
well as the machinery envisioned by developers of infor-
mation semantics. In the last chapter of TOOC, I write
that the challenge is to defend the claim that there is
any narrow content at all. Although narrow content may
play some role in the processes through which wide
content is determined (e.g., by constraining the nature
of the causal connections between certain classes of
symbols and the entities they represent), it in no way
exhausts them. Nonetheless, Rips & Hespos raise an
important point – any workable dual factor theory will
have to specify how the two factors work together.
Commentator Mandelbaum also raises concerns about
the very possibility of a dual factor theory of concepts. He
points out that my proposal for specifying the narrow
content of symbols in core cognition differs from my pro-
posal for how to do so in the case of concepts that arise
through episodes of Quinian bootstrapping, and he
rightly points out that neither proposal applies to newly
acquired atomic concepts, such as, taking his example,
Response/Carey: Pre´ cis of The Origin of Concepts
BEHAVIORAL AND BRAIN SCIENCES (2011) 34:3 161
fence. I agree. I believe it is unlikely that there is one sol-
ution to the problem of specifying what aspects of concep-
tual role determine narrow content. Different kinds of
concepts will require different solutions. The theoretical
challenge is to ﬁnd the principled distinctions among
types of concepts, as well as to specify what aspects of con-
ceptual role determine narrow content of each type.
I do discuss the question of how newly acquired atomic
concepts might get their content, focusing on the proposal
by Laurence and Margolis (2002) and of Macnamara
(1986) (see also Weiskopf 2008). Their example is a
natural kind term, such as tiger. The narrow content of a
newly learned public symbol “tiger” or a newly coined
mental symbol tiger is same natural kind as [kind syn-
drome of a tiger], where the kind syndrome might be rep-
resented as a prototype, set of exemplars, or intuitive
theory. The work done by the abstract schema for a
natural kind is that the holder of this representation is
open to almost everything in the kind syndrome being
revisable; that is, this concept falls under all of the assump-
tions of psychological essentialism and the division of cog-
nitive labor of deferring to tiger experts. Therefore, the
relevant aspect of conceptual role that determines
content here is not the whole kind syndrome, but that
which determines the nature of the function between
the symbol and the world, including that which deter-
mines that the symbol is a symbol for a natural kind. An
analogous solution could apply for fence. My guess is
that there is an artifact kind schema that supports mean-
ings like same artifact kind as [kind syndrome for a
fence], where the information in the kind syndrome is
taken to be tentative and revisable (i.e., not itself content
determining). The schema speciﬁes the importance of
function and original intent of the designers, leaving
open that current representations of these may be
wrong. On this view, it would be possible to have the
lexical item “fence” in one’s vocabulary without yet
having assigned it to that minimal schema (e.g., if all one
knew about fences are that they are something that
make good neighbors – after all, good intentions and
warm feelings make good neighbors too, but these are
neither artifact kinds nor fences).
R6.4. Is concept learning “explicable by content?”
Commentator Shea raises the possibility that TOOC pro-
vides a recognizably psychological explanation of the
acquisition of concepts that does not ﬁt the dominant
explanation schema in psychology. Speciﬁcally, he
suggests that my accounts of concept acquisition neither
rely (solely) on rational inference nor on explanation by
content. I am not sure what philosophers mean by “expla-
nation by content,” so my response is tentative. As I under-
stand it, explanation by content is explanation in terms of
non-metalinguistic inferences over mental representations
alone, as when we explain an agent’s opening the refriger-
ator by appeal to the agent’s desire for an apple and belief
that there is one in the refrigerator. This is explanation by
content because it makes no appeal to the truth of the
matter of the location of an apple.
I agree with Shea’s gloss of the bootstrapping process
that underlies the transition between the subset-knower
stage and the cardinal principle– knower stage: “Carey
rightly rejects the idea that it is properly described as
hypothesis testing. The child is doing something different:
building an uninterpreted model with the counting words,
and then giving that model an interpretation.” My “unin-
terpreted” here refers to wide content; the model is not
yet mapped to numbers. However, I believe that cognitive
modeling is a rational process, and the cognitive model has
narrow content given by inferential role. Therefore in one
sense of “explanation by content,” this is an explanation by
content. Shea criticizes this proposal because it would lead
to pernicious holism. I do not see why. This proposal is
important to my characterization as to which aspects of
inferential role determine narrow content in the case of
concepts whose origin lies in episodes of Quinian boot-
strapping. And the holism is not pernicious, because not
every aspect of the conceptual system is potentially
content determining.
When the child induces that the each numeral rep-
resents a cardinal value one more than the preceding
one, the child conﬁrms that guess against further input.
That is, cognitive modeling is a rational process. Impor-
tantly, the numerical content of the count routine is
partly implicit, just as the numerical content of parallel
individuation is implicit. Representations of the successor
function, insofar as they are attributable to the newly
minted cardinal principle –knower, are carried in the
counting principles the child masters. That is, learning to
count is learning a skill. Therefore, the question I would
ask Shea is whether skill acquisition is explainable by
content? If not, it is easy to ﬁnd violations of the principle
that all explanation in psychology is explanation by
content. If so, then learning the count list is not a counter-
example to the principle. My instinct is to favor the latter
possibility.
The same questions arise with respect to Shea’s charac-
terization of how the child becomes a “one”-knower, and
then a “two”-knower. What the child is learning is a pro-
cedure, and the procedure the child builds draws on rep-
resentational and computational resources that are part of
core cognition. That is, procedurally, the child does have
the resources out of which a hypothesis about one-ness
could be constructed (even though the child has no
symbol for one that could articulate a hypothesis about
what the word “one” means.) The enriched parallel indivi-
duation account of the meaning of “one” in the subset-
knower stage is that the child makes a long-term
memory model of a single individual, a model that is iden-
tical in format to core cognition’s working memory models
formulated in terms of individual ﬁles, and acquires the
following procedure for applying the word “one:” if a
working memory model of a given set can be put in one-
to-one correspondence with that long-term memory
model, then “one” applies to that set. Similarly for “two.”
The process by which the child builds these procedures
is rational; it does not depend only on correlations
mediated by causal connections to the same external-
world property.
R7. Concluding remark
I thank my commentators again for their clarifying
remarks. The controversies aired in our debates conﬁrm
the interdependence of the projects of explaining the
origin and nature of concepts.
