What Babies Know. Elizabeth S. Spelke, Oxford University Press. © Elizabeth S. Spelke 2022.
DOI: 10.1093/ oso/ 9780190618247.003.0007
7
Agents
In this chapter, I focus on the early development of knowledge of animate beings.
The most important animate beings, for infants, are people: Infants’ survival
depends entirely on the actions of others, and people remain interdependent
throughout our lives. Nevertheless, human survival also depends on abilities
to recognize and reason about the actions of a host of animals, including pests,
predators, prey, and pets. I defer discussion of social knowledge to chapter 8 and
focus here on infants’ knowledge of people and animals as agents: living beings
who cause their own motions and, by moving, change the state of the objects on
which they act.
People and most animals have bodies that are cohesive and bounded; we exist
and move continuously; we cannot pass through walls or other objects; and
our motions and states, including mental states, are subject to the constraints
of contact mechanics. All our perceptions, for example, depend on events that
occur on contact with our sensors. People and animals also grow, and the forms
of our growing bodies allow us to move and function in ways that sustain life.
Nevertheless, people and animals have two properties that inanimate living and
nonliving objects lack: We generate forces from within that allow us to move au-
tonomously, causing changes in the things we act on, and we perceive things at a
distance, allowing us to direct our actions to goals.
Much of our reasoning in the domains of politics, economics, law, ethics, and
ordinary life rests on the assumption that the changes that we and other people
produce result from our chosen actions. We assume that people have options and
make consequential choices: Had a person acted otherwise, the state of the world
would differ. We also view people’s actions as windows into their minds: By
observing what people do, we can discover what they know, want, and aim to
achieve. The premise that people choose their actions has been questioned by
philosophers (e.g., Dennett, 1984), social psychologists (e.g., Wegner, 2002),
neuroscientists (e.g., Gazzaniga, 2011), and others. I will not defend this premise
but note that it is nearly unshakeable. For example, I cannot help but believe that
I have chosen to work on this book, and that all the other activities that tempted
me were real options.
What are the sources of our intuitions about our own and others’ actions
and the mental states that guide them? I begin by turning to research on infants
for insights into this question. First, I ask whether and how infants distinguish
Agents 249
self-moving agents from inanimate objects (section 1). Then I ask whether
infants view the actions of agents as causally efficacious (section 2), efficient (sec-
tion 3), goal-directed (section 4), and guided by what agents perceive (section
5) as well as what they want and believe (section 6). Research on infants provides
evidence that their understanding of agents and their actions centers on a system
of interconnected, abstract, and limited concepts, but this research leaves the
status of infants’ mental state concepts unresolved. The core knowledge hypo-
thesis predicts, however, that a core agent system will be ancient, automatic,
encapsulated, and dependent on attention. Accordingly, I turn to studies of agent
representations in animals (section 7) and human adults (section 8) for further
insights into core capacities for reasoning about agents’ mental states, and I pre-
sent new tests of two of those insights (section 9). Although evidence is incom-
plete, I suggest that a system of core knowledge, with the properties discussed
in chapter 5, is the primary source of our mature intuitions about our own and
others’ actions (section 10). The system, however, supports only limited abilities
to reason about the mental states that guide our actions.
1 Infants’ Perception of People and Animals
As adults, we distinguish people and other animals from inanimate objects in at
least three ways. First, people and other animals have bodies, composed of parts
with characteristic shapes that undergo distinctive patterns of motion. Second,
people and animals have heads with eyes that allow them to adapt their actions
to the objects and surfaces within their field of view. They therefore move in
the direction in which they are facing and act on things toward which they are
looking. Third, people and animals tend to initiate and change their movements
in the absence of external forces, counter the motions of objects that impinge on
them, and direct their movements efficiently to objects that are physically and
perceptually accessible to them. Each of these properties, by itself, can support
adults’ detection of an agent: When a body moves spontaneously toward an ob-
ject, circumventing obstacles efficiently to approach it, we perceive an agent even
if the body has no visible face, limbs, or biological motion (Heider & Simmel,
1944; Gelman, Durgin, & Kaufman, 1995; Gergely et al., 1995; Baker, Saxe, &
Tenenbaum, 2009). What of infants?
Human infants and controlled-reared animals perceive and attend to the
movement patterns generated by vertebrate bodies, but they are surprisingly
insensitive to the features that distinguish human from animal bodies (see
chapter 6). Infants learn to recognize human body parts and their arrangements,
likely by drawing on their sensitivity to self-propelled, biological motion (S.
Ullman, Harari, & Dorfman, 2012). Consistent with that possibility, infants
250 What Babies Know
come to recognize not only human hands and feet but also the words that name
these body parts by 6 months of age (Bergelson & Swingley, 2012; Tincoff &
Jusczyk, 2013), and they infer people’s body structure from moving lights on
their joints as they walk or dance (Johansson, 1973; Moore et al., 2007). Thus,
infants’ ability to perceive agents likely depends, in part, on specialized motion-
sensitive mechanisms that evolved in a distant, common ancestor of all verte-
brate species and that support infants’ learning about human and animal bodies,
body parts, and actions.
Infants also are sensitive to faces at birth, both when viewing real people or
animals and in schematic displays. The youngest infants prefer to look at upright
rather than inverted faces but are equally attracted to the faces of diverse spe-
cies of animals. The same preferences are found in chicks and monkeys, attesting
to the ancient origins of face perception. Because the most extensive research
on infants’ sensitivity to faces focuses on their social inferences and preferences,
I review this literature in chapter 8.
Do similarly ancient, early-emerging mechanisms allow animals and infants
to represent and reason about agents’ actions? In the rest of this chapter, I con-
sider the developmental origins of reasoning about actions as self-generated,
causally efficacious, goal-directed, and efficient. Then I ask whether infants are
sensitive to the physical states that constrain agents’ movements and the mental
states that guide their actions.
2 Infants’ Attributions of Causal Powers to People
and Animals
When agents act on inanimate objects, their actions provide information
about the workings of the world. Well before babies can pick up objects, they
observe other people’s object-directed actions (Cicchino, Aslin, & Rakison,
2011; S. Ullman et al., 2012). Because motion is critical to infants’ perception
of objects, young infants likely represent the unity, boundaries, and interactions
between inanimate objects primarily when other people act on them (chapter 2).
These actions also provide information about objects’ functional properties: As
infants watch other people manipulate cups and books, they begin to learn about
the activities these objects afford (chapter 6).
More deeply, by observing the actions of other agents, and by acting on objects
themselves, children may come to infer the causal structure of the world. They
may determine whether flipping a switch causes a light to go on, by choosing
when to flip and not flip the switch, and see if their choice determines the out-
come (Mill, 1865; Helmholtz, 1867). Children also may discover the hidden
mechanisms that connect the movement of the switch to the activation of the
Agents 251
light by observing that an adult’s removal of the plate that covers the switch does
not alter this relation, but cutting the wires beneath it does. Thus, children may
gain insight into the workings of physical systems both by acting on those systems
and by observing other agents’ actions, because agents have the power to choose
their actions and thereby to transform the objects around them (Muentener &
Lakusta, 2011; Muentener & Schulz, 2012; Wu, Muentener, & Schulz, 2016).
Do infants attribute causal powers to agents? In chapter 2, I described two
experiments that suggest they do. The experiments focused on a simple animated
event involving two objects, usually circles or squares, with no animate features. If
one such object appears on-screen in a state of uniform motion and collides with a
second, stationary object, which begins to move at the moment of impact, adults
perceive the first object’s motion as the cause of the second object’s motion, although
we do not invest either object with the power to move on its own: We see them as
billiard balls that cause changes in one another’s motion, not as animate beings
(Michotte, 1963; figure 7.1a). Interestingly, 10-month-old infants, tested with this
“launching” event in experiments by Cicchino et al. (2011), failed to see the first
moving object as causing the motion of the second object. Infants’ perception of this
event differed, however, when the first object began at rest and then spontaneously
began to move toward the second object and collided with it (Figure 7.1b): Now
infants represented the first object as causing both its own motion and the motion of
the second object (Leslie & Keeble, 1987; Cicchino et al., 2011).
The same effects were found in controlled-reared chicks, tested in an
imprinting paradigm (Mascalzoni, Regolin, & Vallortigara, 2010; described in
chapter 2, figure 2.8). Separate groups of newly hatched chicks were imprinted
to two versions of the launching event, and then their preference between
the two objects that participated in the event was measured by placing the
objects at opposite ends of a chick’s cage and observing the classic signs of
imprinting: the chicks’ tendency to remain close to one of the objects. Chicks
who saw the first object spontaneously change its state, from rest to motion
and from motion to rest, selectively imprinted to that object, whereas those
who did not see either object start or stop its own motion spontaneously did
not.1 Because the object of a chick’s imprinting is an animate being, not an
1 As noted in chapter 2, Justin Wood (personal communication) has attempted to replicate the
first of these experiments, using the events in Figure 7.1b. This replication produced a different
finding: Chicks who were imprinted to the launching event like that of Leslie & Keeble (1987), be-
ginning and ending with visible changes in both objects’ motions, developed affiliative tendencies
toward both objects: They preferred each of the objects in the launching event to a third, novel ob-
ject, providing evidence that they imprinted to both objects, suggesting that both were seen as ani-
mate. One difference between the studies in the two labs is that in Wood’s experiments, chicks were
exposed to the launching event throughout all their waking hours, whereas in Vallortigara’s lab,
chicks lived in darkness except during exposure to relatively brief imprinting sessions. It is possible
that the attribution of causal powers to objects that change their motion is probabilistic and varies in
degree. If an object stops moving with no evident cause sufficiently often, we may attribute its beha-
vior to an internal cause, rather than to unseen external factors.
252 What Babies Know
inanimate object, these findings suggest that chicks viewed the first object
in the causal event as an animate being with causal powers (Michotte, 1963;
Saxe & Carey, 2006). Infants, chicks, and adults may be highly predisposed
to attribute causal powers to an object that initiates its own motion, and less
predisposed to attribute such powers to an object that stops its own motion,
either because attending to motion onsets is computationally efficient (T.
Ullman et al., 2017, see chapter 2) or because in many cases, moving objects
stop moving because friction and resisting media slow them down or block
their forward progress, making changes from motion to rest more likely to
occur in the absence of any causal agent.
(a) (b) (c)
Figure 7.1 Displays for studies of infants’ inferences of action on contact. In (a), the
red disk enters from the left, moving at constant speed (top) and stops upon contact
with the green disk (middle), which begins to move at the same speed and exits on
the right (bottom). In (b), the two disks are visible onscreen throughout the event.
Both objects begin at rest (top), and then the red disk begins to move rightward
toward the green disk, which begins to move on contact. Finally, the green disk stops
moving at the right and again is seen at rest. Reprinted from Kominsky & Scholl
(2020). In (c) infants are familiarized with videorecorded events in which a person
walks behind a screen toward a stationary object and after a pause, the object begins
to move (top). At test, the screen is removed, and infants view alternating events in
which the person contacts the object and pushes it (middle) or stops short of the
object, which begins to move without contact (bottom). Infants looked longer at
the latter event, providing evidence that they expected the agent to set the object in
motion on contact. (Reprinted from Kosugi & Fugita, 2002.)
Agents 253
Infants are sensitive to further cues to animacy. In one series of experiments,
Sabina Pauen and Birgit Träuble presented 7-month- old infants with two
objects—a multicolored ball and a toy animal with a face and furry tail but no vis-
ible limbs. The objects stood on opposite sides of a puppet stage, without moving,
while infants’ looking time to each object was recorded. Infants showed equal
interest in the two objects during this initial period of familiarization. Then a
curtain closed, and when it opened again, the animal and ball were attached and
moved together around the stage in fits and starts. Infants typically watched this
event with rapt attention. Finally, the curtain closed and reopened to reveal the
critical test display, which was same as the display that began the experiment: the
motionless animal and ball on opposite sides of the screen. Although the display
was the same, infants’ looking behavior differed: They now looked longer at the
toy animal (Pauen & Träuble, 2009).
Why did infants show this looking preference? It cannot reflect an intrinsic
preference for objects with a head or furry body, because infants showed no pref-
erence between these objects in the first phase of the experiment. It also cannot
reflect a preference for stationary objects that have previously changed their
motion in an irregular pattern, because both the ball and the animal underwent
the same irregular motion in the experiment’s second phase. Pauen and Träuble
reasoned that infants’ preference at the end of the study stemmed from a causal
inference they had made: Infants inferred that the pattern of animate motion
shown by the two objects was produced by the object with animate features,
which caused its own motion and thereby caused the motion of the ball. Further
experiments using violation-of- expectancy methods supported this interpre-
tation of their findings (Setoh et al., 2013; Träuble, Pauen, & Poulin-Dubois,
2014).2 Infants’ attribution of causal powers to autonomously moving objects is
robust, and it is influenced systematically by the presence of a face or furry body.
Further experiments reveal a key signature of infants’ causal attribu-
tion: Agents cause changes in other objects only on contact. These experiments
began with a classic study by Alan Leslie (1982, 1984b). Seven-month- old infants
2 Setoh et al. (2013) conducted several experiments presenting infants with a can covered with
soft material that moved on its own in a straight line on an empty stage, in alternation with a hard
box that also moved on its own. Then each object appeared onstage with a person, who lifted and
either rotated each object toward the infant or shook each object, revealing that both objects were
hollow. Infants looked longer when the soft can was revealed to be hollow. These findings suggest
that infants show a further signature of perception of animacy: They expect animate agents to have
internal mechanisms that generate their motions (Gelman & Wellman, 1991). In these experiments,
however, the two visible objects were containers of familiar shapes (a box and can) with no faces, so
it is possible that infants inferred that the container making animate noises and motions contained
an animal, rather than animal insides. Either inference could explain why infants were surprised
when the spontaneously moving container was revealed to be empty. One of their experiments, how-
ever, showed that infants’ surprise was modulated by the presence of animate features, in accord with
Pauen and Träuble’s findings.
254 What Babies Know
were habituated to an event in which a hand picked up an object by reaching for
it, grasping it, and lifting it into the air. Then they viewed an event in which the
hand and object each moved in the same manner but without contact: The hand
stopped short of the object, and then both the hand and object rose into the air
in synchrony, with a visible gap between them. Infants showed marked recovery
from habituation in this condition, but not in further conditions varying the spa-
tial relation of the hand and object but preserving their contact. Recovery from
habituation also did not occur when the hand was replaced by a block of similar
dimensions, even when action on contact was followed by action at a distance.
Leslie concluded that the infants represented the hand, but not the block, as the
cause of the inanimate object’s motion, and that this causal attribution occurred
only when the motion of the object began on contact with the hand. The infants
in these experiments therefore showed two signatures of causal attribution,
which depended both on the animate motion of the hand and on the contact of
the hand with the object (see also S. Ullman et al., 2012).
Variations of the experiment extended these findings. In one series of studies,
8- month-old infants viewed events involving a person and an object, rather than
two inanimate objects. In each event, a person moved toward a large stationary
object that stood behind a screen, the person disappeared behind the screen, and
soon the object began to move away from the person (figure 7.1c). After famil-
iarization to this event, the screen was removed, and infants viewed alternating
events in which the person either contacted the object at the time it began to
move or stopped short of the object. Infants looked longer at the latter event,
providing evidence that they attributed the object’s motion to the agent who
contacted it (Kosugi & Fugita, 2002).
In further studies, 7-month-old infants were shown two windup toy ani-
mals that each underwent an irregular pattern of motion, in turn, on a puppet
stage. One toy moved while it was held by the hand of an experimenter; the
other moved on its own after the experimenter’s hand released it and remained
on stage but out of contact with the object. On a subsequent preference test
presenting the two objects without motion, infants looked longer at the ob-
ject that had previously moved with no contact with the hand: They evidently
inferred that the motion of that object was internally generated, whereas the
motion of the other object was caused by the experimenter (Markson & Spelke,
2006). Note that in this experiment, infants inferred that a toy with animal
features did not cause its own motion when it was in contact with another,
more familiar, and more convincingly animate object: the experimenter’s
hand. In contrast, infants inferred that the toy animal caused its own motion
when it spontaneously underwent changes in motion in the absence of con-
tact with the experimenter. In further experiments, infants attributed causal
powers to objects that lacked any recognizable face or body parts, provided
Agents 255
that they engaged in jointed, coordinated motions in the absence of contact
with a human hand (Shutts, Markson, & Spelke, 2009).
The simplest experiment revealing the effect of contact was conducted with
displays much like the original studies of Michotte (1963) and Leslie & Keeble
(1987). Cicchino and Rakison (2008) presented infants with two versions of
Michotte’s launching event, involving colored 2D forms. In one version, a yellow
cross moved into view and hit a red cross, which began to move on contact. In
the other version, the yellow cross moved as before but stopped short of a blue
cross, which began to move after a pause. Both the red and blue crosses un-
derwent exactly the same pattern of motion. In a subsequent preference test in
which the red and blue crosses appeared side by side without moving, 6- month-
old infants looked longer at the blue cross, suggesting that they expected it to
move on its own. In contrast, 5-month-old infants showed no looking preference
between the two crosses. Attributions of animacy to a self-propelled object ei-
ther develop between 5 or 6 months or require richer information for animacy at
younger ages.
The last series of experiments on causal attributions, by Paul Muentener
and Susan Carey (2010), sheds light on a further signature of these
attributions: Animate beings can cause a broad array of changes in objects.
The experiments build on findings, discussed in chapter 2, that infants as
young as 3 months of age expect objects to change their motion on con-
tact but do not expect collisions between inanimate objects to cause other
changes in the objects. Presented with a partly occluded launching event in
which a train moves behind a screen and then a stationary block, half-hidden
by the same screen, undergoes a change, infants infer contact between the
train and block if the block begins to move but not if the block breaks apart,
lights up, or makes a noise (Muentener & Carey, 2010). Infants represent
colliding inanimate objects as cohesive bodies that change their motion on
contact, but they have no expectations about objects that light up, make
noise, or fall apart.
In the experiment that sheds light on perception of agency, Muentener and
Carey (2010) presented 8-month-old infants with the displays and methods
of the study just described, with one change: The train was replaced either by
a person’s visible hand and arm or by a novel self-propelled object with a face.
With each of these new objects and each event outcome (the block collapsing
or changing in color), infants now looked longer at the no-contact test events.
Further experiments showed that this inference was robust over variations in the
nature of the test events. For example, infants who were familiarized with the
hand and the collapsing box not only looked longer at the no-contact test event
when the box collapsed but also reversed this test preference when, at test, the
hand contacted the box and it failed to collapse. Infants evidently inferred that
256 What Babies Know
the hand or animal caused the collapse of the block or its color change, and there-
fore occurred on contact with the block.
These studies provide evidence that 8-month- old infants reason about
humans and other agents, but not inanimate objects, in ways that go beyond the
object principles discussed in chapter 2.3 The findings of all these studies there-
fore raise two questions. First, what are the developmental origins of these abili-
ties? Because the infants in these studies were at least 6 months old, it is possible
that they learned to identify the features of objects that are most likely to have
these causal powers: objects with faces, with hands, or with furry bodies. Studies
analyzing the events recorded by a camera on the head of an infant reveal that
the visual world of infants is replete with events in which objects with animate
features cause changes in the motion of other objects (Cicchino et al., 2011), and
research using computational modeling shows how infants who cannot yet reach
for objects might learn to identify the visible properties of animals and human
hands, if they begin with the abstract notion that some bodies—agents—have
causal powers that enable them to move themselves and other objects (S. Ullman
et al., 2012). But do much younger infants endow agents with causal powers?
Second, what cognitive resources underlie the reasoning of infants in the
studies described in this section? Do infants have a unitary system of core
knowledge, focused on agents and their actions, or does their success in these
experiments depend on a set of local expectations: for example, expectations that
interesting things happen when hands contact objects or when objects have eyes?
If infants’ responses to agents depend on a unified system of core knowledge with
the properties of the core object, place, and number systems, then their abili-
ties to reason about agents’ causal powers should rest on an interconnected set
of abstract concepts that are shared by animals and present and functional in
adults. Moreover, the abilities described earlier likely will be found in younger
infants and will support their learning. I turn now to evidence bearing on these
predictions, beginning with more studies of infants.
3 Infants’ Representations of Action Cost
An adult or infant who reaches for an unobstructed moving object aims her
reach so as to take the shortest, least costly path to a point where the object can
3 In this respect, infants differ from older children and adults, who can and do view inanimate
objects and motions as causes of certain state changes: We consider a tornado or a flood to be
the cause of a house’s destruction, and we view falling rocks as the cause of a hiker’s injury. These
developments emerge hand in hand with the development of causal language (Muentener & Schulz,
2012), and such language continues to influence adults’ causal attributions (Kline, Muentener, &
Schulz, 2013). I defer discussion of these developments to How Children Learn.
Agents 257
be intercepted (von Hofsten, 1980). If the object changes its motion before that
point, the actor will redirect her reach in accord with the object’s new direc-
tion and speed of motion (von Hofsten et al., 1998). If a barrier is placed in the
path of an adult human or animal who is moving to a goal object or location, the
adult will circumvent it on a path that efficiently minimizes the length of the de-
tour (Tolman, 1948), whereas infants sometimes are stymied by such obstacles
(Piaget, 1954; Diamond & Gilbert, 1989). As adults, we use these regularities to
predict and interpret the actions of other agents. In this section, I ask whether
infants expect that agents will minimize the cost of their actions.
Classic experiments by Gyorgy Gergely, Gergely Csibra, and their collaborators
investigated how infants understand the circuitous actions of an agent who seeks
an object that stands behind a barrier. In one study (Gergely et al., 1995) 12-
month-old infants viewed an animated agent that repeatedly jumped smoothly
over a barrier and came to rest on the far side of the barrier, next to an object
(figure 7.2a). On different trials, the barrier varied in height, and the agent’s mo-
tion was adjusted accordingly, maximizing the efficiency of its path to the ob-
ject. At test, the barrier was removed, and infants viewed events in which the
agent moved from the starting to the final position either on a familiar but now
inefficient path or on a novel, direct path. Infants in this condition generalized
familiarization
(a)
(b)
test
Figure 7.2 Displays for studies of infants’ inferences about the costs of agents’
actions. In (a), infants inferred that the black barrier blocked the white agent’s direct
path to the red object, leading the agent to circumvent it (left). When the barrier was
removed at test, infants expected the agent to take a direct path to the object (right)
and looked longer when it repeated its original action (center). In (b) infants viewed
the white agent taking a curvilinear path to its goal across a space that was partly
occluded (left). In accord with the expectation that agents will act efficiently, they
inferred that a hidden obstacle stood in the agent’s path (as at right), and they looked
longer when the occluder was removed to reveal no such object (center). (Reprinted
from Gergely & Csibra, 2003.)
258 What Babies Know
habituation to the direct path and looked longer at the familiar but deviating
path; those in a control condition, who were familiarized with the same jumping
motions in the absence of any barrier, did not. These findings suggest that infants
represent agents as solid, as other research attests (Saxe, Tzelnic, & Carey, 2006).
After seeing the agent efficiently circumvent the barrier in its path, they expected
the agent to take a direct path to its goal after the barrier was removed.
Further studies showed that this effect is robust: Presented with the same cur-
vilinear motions as in the original study but with a screen occluding the space
the agent jumped over, infants inferred that an unseen barrier stood behind
the screen, leading the agent to take a detour (Csibra et al., 2003; figure 7.2b).
Importantly, infants failed to make this inference when presented with the same
motions over objects whose tops appeared at the same height as the barrier but
that were suspended in midair, leaving a gap below that afforded a direct path
to the object (Csibra et al., 1999). Infants’ inferences, therefore, do not depend
on their abilities to learn simple regularities connecting features of the display
to features of the agent’s actions (e.g., an agent’s jump will always just exceed the
height of a given object). Instead, infants assessed the agent’s path in relation to
its goal, to the constraints posed by other objects, and to the availability of alter-
native paths by which the agent could arrive at the goal.
Still further studies extended these findings to events involving human ac-
tors and either multistep or incomplete actions. In one study, 16-month- old
toddlers saw a person reach equally often to two equidistant, featurally identical
objects. One object stood inside a transparent container from which it could
be retrieved directly; the other object stood under a transparent cover (a twin
of the container, presented upside down) that first had to be removed: a more
costly action. Infants looked longer when the person reached toward the latter
object, suggesting that they expected her to choose the less costly action (Scott
& Baillargeon, 2013). In another study, 10- and 12-month- old infants viewed
a person reaching over a barrier on an indirect path toward an object that was
too far away to be grasped on this trajectory: The person therefore failed to ar-
rive at the object. Although infants never saw the person contact the object, they
inferred that the object was the goal of her action and expected her to reach the
object successfully on a direct path, after the barrier was removed (Brandone &
Wellman, 2009). Thus, infants attributed a goal to an agent who failed to attain it,
when the agent’s actions were both object-directed and appropriately adapted to
environmental constraints. Infants expect agents to move efficiently in a variety
of circumstances.
How broad is this expectation? Because the objects in these experiments had
no animate features, and—in one study—did not even engage in patterns of irreg-
ular, self- propelled motion (the object was already in motion when it appeared
on-screen, and it moved smoothly over each barrier), Csibra et al. (1999) initially
Agents 259
proposed that infants expect efficient motion from a broad array of percep-
tible entities, not just from agents. If that proposal were correct, then infants’
attributions of efficiency would not align with their attributions of causal effi-
cacy, which depend on animate features or movements (Saxe & Carey, 2006; sec-
tion 1). Contrary to Csibra et al.’s suggestion, however, experiments by Rebecca
Saxe, Joshua Tenenbaum, and Susan Carey (2005) showed that inferences of effi-
ciency in the Gergely paradigm are restricted to agents with exactly the proper-
ties described in section 1.
Saxe et al. (2005) first allowed 10- and 12-month- old infants to handle an inert
beanbag that generated no self-propelled motion. Then infants watched a series
of events on a puppet stage containing a barrier object, in which the beanbag
emerged at one side of the stage already in motion, passed over a central bar-
rier, and landed on the stage’s opposite side. On different trials, the barrier varied
in color and height, and the beanbag rose just high enough to sail over it, as in
Gergely’s original experiments. Although the source of the beanbag’s motion was
never visible, these events looked to adults as if the beanbag was thrown over
the barrier by a hidden agent (as, indeed, it was). After these events, the infants
viewed alternating test events in which the beanbag flew across the stage as be-
fore, followed by the emergence of either a hand or a train, either on the side
where the beanbag had emerged or on the side where it landed. Infants looked
longer when the hand (but not the train) appeared on the side where the beanbag
landed, providing evidence that the appearance of a hand was more expected on
the opposite side, from which the beanbag was propelled.
Did this inference involve a causal attribution, or simply an association of in-
teresting events with human hands? A key feature of causal reasoning is that dis-
tinct candidate causes compete: If someone sneezes in the presence of a cat, we
are less likely to attribute her sneeze to a cat allergy if we know she has a cold.
That is why, in the animal-ball studies in section 1, attribution of causal powers to
one moving object (the animal) blocked infants’ inference that a second moving
object in contact with it (the ball) was moving under its own power.
Saxe and her collaborators tested for this signature of causal attribution by
conducting a further experiment using the same familiarization and test events,
but replacing the beanbag by a puppet with a face and body. Infants first saw
the puppet move spontaneously across the stage, in an irregular pattern of chan-
ging motion. Then infants saw the puppet fly across the barriers, before the hand
appeared on the test events. In contrast to the study with the beanbag, infants
looked equally at the test events presenting the hand at the two locations: Given
evidence that the puppet was self-propelled, infants did not expect another agent
to appear at the location where its motion began. Thus, infants do not simply
expect hands to appear at places where interesting things have happened, or vis-
ible motions to follow events in which people are present. Infants make causal
260 What Babies Know
inferences, attributing the visible motion of an inanimate object, but not an ob-
ject with animate features and behavior, to an unseen agent.
Saxe et al.’s (2005) studies provide evidence that inferences of efficient ac-
tion occur only when infants infer that an agent—a being with the power to
move from within and to cause changes in other objects through its motions—
is the source of the motion. This finding supports a different interpretation of
the findings of Csibra et al. (1999). When an object sails on efficient paths over
barriers of different heights without ever visibly changing its motion in a manner
that would suggest it has causal powers, infants infer that an unseen agent set
the object in motion. Thus, the expectation of efficient motion does not apply to
all moving objects, but only to objects that are agents themselves or that are set
in motion by an agent. Inferences of action efficiency connect to inferences of
causal efficacy.
The experiments of Gergely and his collaborators have generated rich bodies
of research findings, but they have two limitations. First, because the efficient
actions in the test events of these studies involve motion on a direct and linear
path, infants’ longer looking at the circuitous test motion might reflect specific
expectations that agents will face their goals and move in straight lines to reach
them in the absence of barriers (Johnson, Shimizu, & Ok, 2007) rather than a
general expectation that agents will minimize the cost of their actions. Second,
because the familiarization events in these studies presented an agent that always
jumped just a bit higher than the obstacle in its path, infants may come to expect
that the size of the agent’s jump will be proportional to the size of the obstacle
between the agent and the goal. Such expectations require no general notion of
action efficiency.
As a new graduate student in my lab, Shari Liu conducted a series of
experiments to distinguish between these accounts (Liu & Spelke, 2017). To
determine whether infants expect agents to minimize the cost of their actions,
she familiarized 6-month-old infants with an animated agent that jumped effi-
ciently over high barriers of variable height, as in past studies, but then tested
infants with a much shorter barrier blocking any linear path to the goal. On al-
ternating trials, the agent moved to the goal on two different curved paths, one
involving a high jump that was familiar but now inefficient, the other involving
a low jump that was novel but efficient. Looking times to these events were com-
pared to each other, both in this condition and in a control condition in which
the barriers used for familiarization appeared behind the goal object, such that
all the actions were inefficient. Infants in the experimental condition, but not
the control condition, looked longer when the agent moved on the superficially
familiar, inefficient path. Thus, infants expect efficient action in situations where
action predictions are not supported by the simple rule that unobstructed agents
move in straight lines, directly to their goals.
Agents 261
To determine whether infants expected the more efficient action the first time
they saw the agent face a novel set of constraints, Shari conducted a further ex-
periment using the test events with the low barrier, preceded by familiarization
with higher jumps of variable height. In this study, the barriers stood behind
the goal object during familiarization and moved in front of that object only at
test, so that only the test presented the agent taking an efficient, object-directed
action. Infants again looked longer at the test event presenting the less efficient
action: a high jump over a low barrier. At 6 months, therefore, infants expect
efficient action from agents that have never displayed efficient action in the
past, the first time that an agent confronts a new situation. If an agent acts ineffi-
ciently in a particular situation (as in the control conditions of Gergely’s and Liu’s
experiments), infants learn to override that assumption for that agent and situa-
tion. In the absence of such learning, however, infants who view new situations
expect the actions of agents to be as efficient as the environmental constraints
allow, even if they have acted inefficiently in other situations.
4 Infants’ Representations of Agents’ Goals
When an agent jumps over a barrier and arrives at a new location, efficiency
calculations depend on the assumption that the end state of the agent’s action was
the goal of the action: If the jumping had been performed for its own sake, or as
part of a dance or exercise, then different inferences about future actions would
have followed (Schachner & Carey, 2013). The experiments described in section 2
therefore suggest that infants view agents’ causally efficacious actions as directed
toward achieving the end state that the action brings about. Those experiments
do not reveal how infants determine an agent’s goal, however, because they did
not vary any properties of the end state that the agent achieved: Every action in
the studies described in the last section carried the agent to the same object in the
same position. In natural environments, in contrast, people and animals move
in multiple directions, to different locations furnished with diverse objects. Can
infants determine the goal of an person’s action under these conditions?
Landmark research by Amanda Woodward addressed this question. She
investigated infants’ inferences about the goals of a person who engages in a
simple action in the presence of two objects. In her first experiments, 6- to 8-
month-old infants saw a toy bear and a ball, each standing on a pedestal, and
a human hand that emerged from offstage, grasped one of the objects (for half
the infants, the bear), and remained at rest on the object until the infant looked
away, whereupon a curtain closed to end the event (figure 7.3). To test whether
infants encoded this action as directed to the bear, infants were habituated to re-
peated presentations of this event, and then the bear and ball switched positions.
262 What Babies Know
On alternating test trials, the hand entered and moved to the new object or to
the new location. Each of these actions differed from the original action in one
way, but infants did not treat these differences as equivalent: They looked longer
when the hand moved on the old path to the new goal object (Woodward, 1998).
Infants evidently individuate actions not by their trajectories but by their goal
objects. But do infants view reaches to the same object as guided by the actor’s
intentions?
Woodward addressed this question in a series of glorious experiments;
here is a quick summary. Infants represent acts of reaching as directed to goal
objects when they view a moving human hand and arm, but not when they
view a moving object that lacks bodily features. If the hand and arm in the orig-
inal event are replaced by a rigid stick with a sponge or claw at its end, infants
do not show what I will hereafter call the Woodward effect: They do not look
longer when the stick approaches and touches the new object in the old location
Habituation (left or right)(a)
Test (left and right)
Incomplete reaching
Pointing
(b)
Figure 7.3 (a) Schematic depiction of the endpoints of the events during
habituation and test in the original experiment by Woodward (1998). After
habituation to one of the two reaching actions, each 6-month-old infant saw the ball
and bear in the opposite locations, before the two alternating test actions occurred.
Infants looked longer at the test action presenting the same trajectory and ending in
a different object. (b) The incomplete reaching and matched pointing actions in the
experiment by Hamlin et al. (2008). After viewing the actress reaching for one of two
objects unsuccessfully, the 7-month-old infants selectively reached for the object
she had tried to obtain. In contrast, the infants reached equally for the two objects
after the actress pointed to one of them. Before infants understand pointing (at the
end of the first year), they infer the goal of an incomplete reach toward an object.
(Reprinted from Woodward, 1998, and Hamlin et al., 2008.)
Agents 263
(Woodward, 1998). Infants also do not show the Woodward effect if the human
hand is gloved, changing its color and texture, although they do show the effect if
they can see that the gloved hand belongs to a person with an otherwise normal
body and face (Guajardo & Woodward, 2004).
In these studies, the Woodward effect is not explained by infants’ greater atten-
tion to the familiar object during habituation, because attention to that object is
comparable across conditions that do and do not elicit this effect. Moreover, the
effect is not limited to events involving recognizable human bodies: Infants show
the Woodward effect when presented with an object with no bodily features, pro-
vided that the object undergoes animate biological motion (Schlottmann & Ray,
2010). Thus, infants appear to attribute goals to agents by using the same features
that elicit infants’ expectations that agents cause changes in objects (section
2) and act efficiently (section 3).
In further studies, Woodward presented infants with the human arm and
hand in the original study under conditions of passive motion: The hand fell on
the bear, palm up, instead of making a controlled approach to it, palm down. In
this condition, infants did not show the Woodward effect: That effect requires
that a person act in a deliberate, controlled manner (Woodward, 1999). Infants
also do not view object motions as goal-directed actions if a person approaches
an object but does so without consistently facing in the direction in which she
is moving (Shimizu & Johnson, 2004; Csibra, 2008; Baillargeon et al., 2009).
Thus, infants do not see all animate motions that end on contact with an object,
performed by people with hands and arms, as directed to that object.
Conversely, infants see some actions that fail to end on contact with an ob-
ject as goal-directed. Evidence for this ability comes from studies led by Kiley
Hamlin. She first showed that infants who have seen a person choose one of two
objects, and then view the objects within their own reaching distance, will reach
more often for the object that the person had chosen (Hamlin, Hallinan, and
Woodward, 2008). Based on that finding, she presented a new group of infants
with an actress who faced two out-of- reach objects and extended her arm toward
one of the objects, but failed to attain it. When the two objects then appeared
within reach of the infants, they reached primarily for the object that she had
previously tried and failed to grasp. Thus, infants represented the object as the
goal of the actress’s incomplete reach and aligned their own actions with her
intentions, rather than her specific movements.
Studies of goal attribution in infancy reveal not only infants’ successful
representations of goal-directed actions but also limits to their action under-
standing. First, there are limits to the specificity of infants’ representations of goal
objects. Elisabet (Liesje) Spaepen and I presented 12-month- old infants with two
familiar objects, either in distinct categories (a doll and a truck) or in the same
category (two dolls of different race and gender, or two trucks of different colors,
264 What Babies Know
materials, and detailed shapes), and a person who reached for one of the objects
(Spaepen & Spelke, 2007). Infants showed the Woodward effect in the first con-
dition, looking longer when the person who had previously reached for a truck
now reached for a doll. In contrast, infants did not show the Woodward effect
when the person was presented with two dolls or two trucks and consistently
reached for one doll or truck over the other, despite evidence that infants dis-
criminated between the members of each pair of toys.
In light of the findings of Xu and Carey (1996; see chapter 2), Liesje and
I wondered whether infants might have failed to individuate the object-directed
actions more finely because they failed to track the two goal objects over occlu-
sion. To address this possibility, we repeated the experiments but left the two
potential goal objects continuously in view, visibly switching positions between
the habituation and test trials. Again, infants failed to show the Woodward effect
when an agent reached for one of two distinct dolls or trucks, providing further
evidence for a limit in infants’ attributions of action goals. People often target
their actions to specific objects: On leaving a restaurant, we want our own coat,
not just any coat on the rack. Infants, however, may distinguish between different
action goals in the Woodward paradigm only when the goal objects would be
classified as having different forms and functions.
Second, there are limits to the nature of the action goals that infants attribute
to agents. Feiman, Carey, and Cushman (2015) presented 7-month- old infants
with a succession of reaching events in which a bear consistently appeared, in
alternation, on the left or right sides of the stage, together with a second object
that changed from trial to trial. In one condition, the agent consistently reached
for the bear; in the other condition, the agent consistently avoided the bear
and reached for a new object on each trial. After habituation, infants in both
conditions viewed the bear paired with one of the other objects, and the agent’s
hand alternately reached to each object. Infants in the first condition showed the
Woodward effect: They looked less at reaches to the bear than at reaches to the
other object, providing evidence that they represented the previous reaches as
directed to the bear. In contrast, infants in the second condition looked equally
at the two test events. These findings suggest, first, that infants do not represent
the action goal of obtaining a new object. On every trial, the actor in this study
chose a new object over the continuously visible bear, yet infants never appeared
to learn to anticipate this choice, even though they are sensitive to novelty and
are attracted by novel objects. Second, the findings suggested that infants do not
represent negative action goals: that is, avoiding the bear.
The third limit to infants’ goal attributions in the Woodward paradigm comes
from studies that focused on an object-directed action that emerges at birth and
is extensively exercised thereafter: looking at objects. Brune and Woodward
(2007) presented infants with the same bear and ball on pedestals as in studies of
Agents 265
reaching. Instead of reaching for one of the two objects on repeated trials, how-
ever, the actor turned and looked intently at one of the two objects. When the
object positions were exchanged at test, infants up to 10 months of age looked no
longer when the person turned to look at the new object than when she looked
again at the old object. Only 12-month-old infants showed the Woodward effect
in these experiments. These findings suggest that younger infants do not view
looking as an object-directed action.
The fourth limit has received the most attention: In a variety of situations,
infants show the Woodward effect only when they view object-directed actions
that they themselves can perform (Sommerville & Woodward, 2010). For ex-
ample, 3- month-old infants, who cannot yet reach for, grasp, and pick up
objects, fail to show the Woodward effect when they view an agent reaching for
the bear over the ball. The Woodward effect emerges between 3 and 5 months,
with the emergence of infants’ own abilities to pick up objects. Similarly, infants
under 9 months, who do not point to objects, fail to represent another agent’s
pointing at one of two objects as directed to that object, rather than to that spa-
tial position (Woodward & Guajardo, 2002; Brune & Woodward, 2007; see also
Sodian & Thoermer, 2004). Understanding of others’ pointing emerges at about
12 months, together with the emergence of a penchant for pointing at objects
themselves (Brune & Woodward, 2007). Finally, infants under 12 months, who
fail to engage in sequences of causally related actions, such as pulling a cloth to
obtain an out-of- reach toy that sits on it (Piaget, 1952), also fail to infer that an-
other agent who performs this action is aiming for the toy rather than the cloth
(Sommerville & Woodward, 2005a, 2005b).
These findings led Sommerville and Woodward to propose that infants learn
about other agents’ action goals through their experience with their own object-
directed actions, beginning when they start to pick up objects at 4–5 months.
Amy Needham developed a means for testing this hypothesis through an im-
portant series of training experiments, using a device she called “sticky mittens.”
Three-month-old infants were outfitted with a pair of mittens that had a Velcro
palmar surface, and they were presented with a pair of objects whose surfaces
stuck to the Velcro. Although infants do not begin to grasp and pick up objects
until 4– 5 months of age, the infants who wore the mittens were able to pick up the
objects just by touching them. Over the course of one brief session, the infants
learned to do this, and they showed enduring effects of this learning on their sub-
sequent manipulations of objects (Needham, Barrett, & Peterman, 2002).
Sommerville, Woodward, and Needham (2005) therefore used sticky mittens
to investigate the effects of the infant’s action experiences on their representations
of other agents’ goals. Two groups of 3-month- old infants were tested with the
standard Woodward method, while viewing an adult who reached for a ball or
a bear while wearing mittens. Both groups of infants also received Needham’s
266 What Babies Know
mittens training, wearing mittens with the same patterns as those used by the
actor and reaching to the same two objects: One group received the mittens
training before participating in the Woodward experiment, and the other group
received the two sessions in the reverse order. Infants who had first learned to use
the sticky mittens showed the Woodward effect; the others did not.
Experiments with sticky mittens show that infants’ own action experience
influences their understanding of the actions of others, but why? Many consid-
erations, logical and empirical, raise problems for the hypothesis that infants
learn to understand the actions of others by first learning to perform the actions
themselves (Saxe, 2009, provides a useful discussion), including the findings of
experiments using the Woodward method. For example, this hypothesis does
not readily explain why older infants failed to represent individual objects as ac-
tion goals in Spaepen’s studies, given that they themselves often directed their
actions to their individual cat or teddy bear rather than to cats and teddies in ge-
neral. It also doesn’t explain why older infants failed to represent the action goals
of reaching for a novel object or of avoiding an undesirable object in Feiman’s
studies, as these also are goals that infants themselves have experienced. And
the Somerville/Woodward hypothesis would seem to predict that infants should
represent an agent’s looking at an object as goal-directed before they represent
an agent’s reaching as goal-directed, because infants become adept at exploring
objects visually before they begin to manipulate objects.
Stepping back from these specifics, it is unlikely that evolution would favor
a learning process that precludes learning from observation about actions
that one cannot yet perform. Bound by this constraint, infants could only dis-
cover new actions by trial and error. If the Somerville/Woodward account is
extended beyond studies using Woodward’s paradigm, moreover, it fails to ex-
plain the findings of the wealth of experiments in which infants attribute goals
to agents whose actions lie outside any infant’s repertoire. Infants who cannot
yet crawl or walk attribute goals to agents who move independently from one
place to another (Csibra, 2008; Luo, Kaufman, & Baillargeon, 2009; section 2),
and infants who cannot yet jump or throw objects attribute goals to agents that
jump or toss beanbags over barriers (Gergely et al., 1995; Saxe et al., 2005; sec-
tion 3). In these cases, infants’ action understanding exceeds their own action
capacities.
I propose, therefore, to reconsider Sommerville and Woodward’s hypothesis,
and the Woodward effect more generally, in the context of the findings described
in earlier sections of this chapter. The same set of conditions governs infants’
causal attributions, their expectations of action efficiency, and their represen-
tation of object motions as goal-directed: All these abilities are manifest when
infants view an object that moves with apparent deliberation and efficiency
under conditions in which no perceptible external force has caused its motion,
Agents 267
especially if the object has animate features such as a face, hands, or the jointed
body of a person or animal and consistently moves in the direction in which it
is facing. Moreover, infants’ attributions of causal powers and of efficiency are
linked: Infants expect efficient action only when they attribute causal powers to
the actor. Finally, efficiency calculations in the Gergely paradigm presuppose
that the end state of the agent’s motion is its goal state: If an actor were jumping
for pleasure or exercise, then walking instead of jumping would fail to achieve
the actor’s goal (Schachner & Carey, 2013).
Based on these considerations, I hypothesize that a single system of core
knowledge underlies all the phenomena described thus far: a core system for
representing and reasoning about agents, their actions, and their mental states. If
that hypothesis is correct, then infants in a Woodward experiment should infer
that the person who reaches for an object has the power to cause changes in the
state of the world, the predisposition to choose actions that effect those changes
as efficiently as possible, and the intention of changing the state of the object on
which she acts.
With these expectations, how would infants construe the events in a
Woodward experiment? Let’s consider a 6-month- old infant in Woodward’s first
study, who sees an actress reach to and rest her hand on a bear rather than a
ball. Reaching for objects is a highly frequent action that is almost always under-
taken with the aim of causing a change in the state of the object: It is a prelude
to an object-directed action, not an end in itself, and it typically is followed by
movement of the hand and object together (S. Ullman et al., 2012). Thus, infants
should expect an actor’s first reach to the bear to be followed by an action on
the bear: For example, she might cuddle the bear, engage in pretend play, move
the bear to a new location, or show the bear to the infant. In a Woodward ex-
periment, however, no actions follow the actor’s reach: Instead, the actor’s hand
comes to rest on the bear without changing its state. By my hypothesis, there-
fore, infants should learn, during the repeated event that occurs over the habit-
uation sequence, that the actor’s movement to the bear is not the prelude to a
bear- directed action. When the person’s hand lands on the bear at test, therefore,
infants should expect no action and pay little attention to that event.
The ball, however, is a different kind of object, with a distinctive form and
affordances. When people reach for a ball, they typically pick it up and move
it: They may bounce it, roll it, toss it in the air, or give it to the child; in all these
cases, their reaching is followed by an action on the ball. Thus, infants who have
learned that the actor will not act on the bear should still expect her to act on
the ball, and they should attend to her movements to discover what she does.
Similarly, infants in the other half of the Woodward experiment, who are habit-
uated to reaches to the ball, should learn, during habituation, that reaches to the
ball are not a prelude to any ball-directed actions. At test, these infants should
268 What Babies Know
expect object-directed actions only when the person reaches to the bear, and at-
tend more when she reaches to that object.
This hypothesis does not challenge Woodward’s primary conclusions: Infants
indeed represent actions as directed to goal objects and as guided by intentions
toward those objects. The hypothesis relates the phenomena she studied to those
described in sections 1 and 2: Just as causal attributions stand at the center of
infants’ apprehension of self-propelled objects and expectations of action effi-
ciency, causal attributions may account for infants’ behavior in all of Woodward’s
experiments.
The hypothesis of a core agent system helps to explain the limits to infants’
goal attributions in experiments using Woodward’s paradigm. First, why do
infants show the Woodward effect when a person reaches for a doll over a truck
but not when she reaches for one of two dolls or trucks? Dolls and trucks afford
different actions. When a person reaches repeatedly for the doll in the presence
of a truck and then does nothing, infants learn that she does not intend to engage
in any of the actions that dolls afford: Her touch is not a prelude to doll-play. This
conclusion does not imply, however, that the person will also fail to play with the
truck when she reaches for it, because trucks afford different actions. In contrast,
when a person reaches repeatedly for one of two dolls and does nothing, infants
have no reason to expect that a shift from first doll to the second one will elicit
a change in the state of the object: Although the two unfamiliar dolls are dif-
ferent individuals, they afford the same sorts of actions: actions that the person
has chosen not to perform.
Second, why do infants show the Woodward effect when a person reaches for
a bear in the context of a parade of companion objects but not when the person
avoids the bear and reaches for each new object? In the first condition, infants
learn that the person’s bear-directed touching will not be followed by a bear-
directed action, but they continue to expect, at test, that her reaching to any of
the other objects will be followed by an action on that object, because people
rarely reach for things unless they plan to act on them. In the second condition,
in contrast, each of the objects the actor touches affords different actions. Since
no action by the agent ever follows, infants learn that this actor’s reach is not a
prelude to actions on any object: learning that generalizes, at test, to the bear.
Third, why do infants under 12 months show no Woodward effect when a
person looks at an object, an action that they have engaged in throughout their
lives? Moreover, why do 12-month-old infants begin to view looking as object-
directed in the Woodward paradigm? Looking at an object does not change the
state of the object—it is not a causally efficacious action—so it elicits in young
infants no attribution, to the person, of an intention to change the state of the
world. At the end of the first year, however, infants begin to share attention to
objects with other people (Tomasello, 2008; to be discussed in chapter 10). In
Agents 269
states of joint attention, object-directed looking indeed becomes an efficacious
action, thanks to its social and communicative functions. Consistent with my hy-
pothesis, the emergence of shared attention correlates, across individual infants,
with the emergence of an understanding of people’s acts of looking as object-
directed in the Woodward paradigm (Brune & Woodward, 2007).
Finally, why do the youngest infants fail to show the Woodward effect un-
less they receive mittens training? If infants’ action understanding depends on
a system of core knowledge, centering on abstract concepts that apply to all an-
imals but oblivious to the more specific concepts that apply to specific human
actions, then this question can be reframed: When do infants begin to expect
that a person who reaches for an object and contacts it with a palmar grasp
intends to cause changes in the object, and what changes does the person intend
to bring about?
Grasping, lifting, and manipulating objects are difficult actions for infants
to understand (and for robots to perform). Although objects canonically are
supported from below, one lifts an object by grasping its top or sides and exerting
pressure on it. If the object is rigid, then this pressure cannot be seen. When
prereaching infants manage to contact an enticing object, moreover, the most
likely outcome will be that the object rolls, bounces away, or slips through their
fingers: One must approach an object gently and exert just the right amount of
pressure— neither too little nor too much—to lift it. To manipulate an object
effectively, moreover, one must adapt one’s actions both to the object’s shape
and functions and to biomechanical constraints on one’s movement. Children
struggle with aspects of this problem for years (Keen, 2011; Ossmy et al., 2021),
and most animals never master this skill. Thus, infants likely must learn that an
actor intends to grasp, pick up, and manipulate an object when the palmar sur-
face of her hand is extended toward the object and her fingers are open, but not
when the back surface of the hand extends toward the object or her fist is closed
(Woodward, 1999; Rochat et al., 2008). Infants who cannot yet pick up objects
may be bewildered by adults’ acts of reaching toward and touching objects.
This hypothesis suggests a different account of the sticky mittens training
effect. When an infant touches an object that sticks to his mittens, he causes a
change in the state of the object on contact, independently of the object’s shape
and of the manner in which it was touched. Over the mittens training, the infant
now can entrain the object and move it at will, without needing to grasp the ob-
ject or approach it gently. Mittens training therefore converts a causally opaque
pick- up action into a causally transparent contact event. After training, when the
infant sees another actor lay her mittened hand on a sticky object, he expects an
action to follow. When no action follows on the succession of habituation trials,
he gives up this expectation but continues to expect an action to follow a reach
for the other object. Thus, mittens-trained infants show the Woodward effect.
270 What Babies Know
This hypothesis explains two further findings from training studies with
sticky mittens (Woodward, 2008). First, mittens training does not produce a
Woodward effect if the mittens-trained infants view an actor who is not wearing
mittens. Because all the infant’s experience has taught her that objects do not
stick to bare hands when they are touched, only reaches wearing the mittens
should elicit expectations of action on contact. Second, mittens training does not
produce a Woodward effect if the adult who is wearing mittens reaches for a dif-
ferent object from the ones used in training. During training, the mittens stick to
the test objects but not to the table or to each other, so expectations of causally
efficacious actions are only warranted for the sticky objects.
This hypothesis makes predictions about goal attributions by younger
infants, some of which have been tested. First, in light of evidence that
attributions of causal efficacy and efficiency are related, the hypothesis
predicts that infants who receive mittens training should expect an agent,
who wears the same mittens and reaches for the same objects, to reach effi-
ciently. Amy Skerry, working with Susan Carey and me, tested this prediction
in a version of the Gergely paradigm (Skerry, Carey, & Spelke, 2013). Three-
month-old infants were randomly assigned to two conditions in which they
explored a set of objects while wearing mittens. In one condition, the mittens
had Velcro that allowed infants to pick up and move the objects on contact;
in the other, the mittens had no Velcro and afforded no such actions (figure
7.4a, A1 and A2).
After this experience, these infants and a separate group of infants who re-
ceived no mittens experience were habituated to filmed events in which an ac-
tress who was wearing a similar Velcro glove reached over a barrier to a goal
object, picked up the object, and displaced it (figure 7.4a, H1). As in the studies
of Gergely’s group and of Brandone and Wellman, the hand consistently moved
on an efficient trajectory over the barrier. When the barrier was removed at test,
the infants who had explored the objects with the Velcro mittens looked longer
at the test event with the familiar but inefficient trajectory, providing evidence
that they expected a direct reach for the object (figure 7.4b). A further experi-
ment, varying the location of the barrier (figure 7.4a, H2), showed that this effect
depended on infants’ expectation that the actress would reach efficiently, not an
expectation that unobstructed arm extensions that will follow straight paths (von
Hofsten, 1980). When the actress reached on the same curvilinear trajectories
during familiarization but the barrier stood behind the object rather than in her
path, infants failed to expect efficient, direct reaching at test. Thus, infants who
wore sticky mittens did not learn to expect straight rather than curved reaches
in general. Infants only expected straight reaches to an object when previous,
curved reaches to the object had been efficient, given the constraints imposed by
the barrier.
Agents 271
These experiments support two conclusions. First, infants do not learn,
from their own experience with sticky mittens, that other agents’ reaching
is constrained by barriers and directed efficiently to objects, with the goal of
causing changes in the objects. The 3-month- old infants in these experiments
never experienced reaching with the mittens in the presence of a barrier, and
so they had no opportunity for such learning during the experiment. Outside
this experimental context, moreover, infants do not become capable of planning
and executing an indirect reach to an object behind a barrier, whether opaque or
transparent, until the end of the first year (Diamond, 1988). When young infants
view another person reaching around a barrier, they understand that the person’s
indirect reaching for the object is goal-directed many months before they them-
selves become capable of performing this action.
Second, infants’ understanding of actions as causally efficacious and as effi-
cient indeed are interconnected. The experience with mittens allowed infants to
reanalyze the agent’s reaching action as having a key signature of actions that
cause changes in the world: They occur on contact between the actor and the
Action phase:
inefficient action
0.6
0.55
0.5
0.45
0.4
looking time proportion
effective
action
training
ineffective
action
training
no
training constrained
action
habituation
unconstrained
action
habituation
Exp 1 Exp 2 Exp 3 Exp 4 Exp 5
efficient action
Habituation phase:
Test phase:
Figure 7.4 Displays for five experiments assessing 3-month-old infants'
representations of actions as object-directed and efficient. In experiments 1–3,
infants first experienced reaching for objects with Velcro mittens (A1), reaching
with mittens without Velcro (A2), or no reaching (A3). Then they were habituated
to events in which an actor reached efficiently over a barrier to an object (H1). In
experiments 4–5, infants first experienced reaching for objects with Velcro mittens
(A1) and then were habituated either to the same efficient action (H1) or to an
inefficient action (H2). All infants were given the same test events, presenting a
novel but efficient reaching trajectory (T1) and a familiar but inefficient reaching
trajectory (T2). Infants expected a direct reach to the object at test only if they had
worn Velcro mittens and had seen efficient reaching over the barrier. (Reproduced
from Skerry et al., 2013.)
272 What Babies Know
object. Once infants attributed a causal intention to the actor, they also inferred
that she would act as efficiently as the environmental conditions allowed, con-
sistent with the hypothesis that a single system underlies attributions of causal
efficacy, efficiency, and goal-directedness.
Skerry’s findings further support the view that young infants’ action under-
standing is guided by the interconnected, abstract concepts of causal efficacy,
goal- directedness, and efficiency. The act of reaching, grasping, and displacing
an object may be baffling to infants who have not mastered it, because it is highly
complex: Successful acts of picking up an object depend on the position, orien-
tation, and shape of the hand and on the pressure it exerts, relative to the shape,
weight, rigidity, and slipperiness of the object. Most animals do not have hands
that can grasp objects, so ancient mechanisms for inferring contact causality
likely are not sufficient for analyzing this action. In the infant’s own experience,
moreover, swiping and contacting an object may cause it to move, but not to en-
train with movements of the hand. When 3-month- old infants without mittens
experience see an agent reach for an object on a curved path, they may wonder
whether this approach from above is a necessary part of a successful pick-up
action. If so, the curved path might be the most efficient means to achieve the
agent’s goal.
This analysis leads to a further prediction: Prereaching infants with no mittens
experience should expect the object-directed actions of an agent to be efficient if
the agent’s action causes a perceptible change in the object simply by contacting
it, even if the infants receive no mittens experience. Shari Liu and Neon Brooks
tested this prediction in experiments in my lab (Liu, Brooks, & Spelke, 2019).
In our first experiment, conducted by Neon, 3-month- old infants viewed an
agent wearing a glove, who extended her hand toward an object exactly as in the
studies just described. Instead of picking up the object, however, she touched
it with the tips of her fingers, whereupon it lit up and made a whirring sound.
When the barrier was removed, infants looked longer at the superficially similar,
now inefficient action on the curved path.
In further studies, Shari probed the reasons for this effect. As in her previous
studies of infants’ expectations of efficient action, she found that infants’ at-
tention to the test events that occurred on removal of the barrier depended on
the position of the barrier during the habituation events. When the barrier was
placed behind the object during habituation so that all the curvilinear reaches
were inefficient, infants looked equally at the two test events. With neither
reaching and grasping experience nor mittens experience, these young infants
expected the agent to reach directly toward the object at test only if her reaches
during familiarization had been efficient.
Shari next asked whether infants’ expectation of efficient action showed the
signature of infants’ causal reasoning: The lighting up of the object occurred
Agents 273
on contact with the hand. She repeated the first experiment with one critical
change: Instead of contacting the object, the hand stopped short of it, and the
object lit up after a pause of 0.5 seconds—conditions that abolish the impression
of causality in the experiments described in section 1. In this condition, infants
showed no expectation of efficient action at test. Then Shari replicated these two
experiments in a single, preregistered study, with random assignment of infants
to the two conditions (contact vs. no contact) and condition-blind experimenters
as well as observers. Except for the half-second period during which the hand
froze in one condition and moved into contact with the object in the other condi-
tion, the two conditions involved entirely identical filmed events.4 Infants again
expected efficient action in the condition with contact between the hand and
object, they failed to expect efficient action in the condition with no contact, and
performance in the two conditions differed reliably. Three-month- old infants’
action representations therefore showed a key signature of causal attribution.
In summary, 3-month-old infants, who cannot pick up objects and manipu-
late them, nevertheless expect the actions of agents who have these abilities to
be efficient and causally efficacious. Because the infants in these experiments
were 3 months old, the experiments do not shed light on the earlier develop-
ment of these expectations. It is possible that younger infants learn that agents
tend to reach on efficient paths in relation to environmental constraints and that
they produce changes in the state of the world on contact. Alternatively, these
assumptions may be built into the cognitive systems by which infants represent
agents and actions. The latter possibility gains some support from the finding
that controlled-reared chicks, given evidence that the moving object in a colli-
sion event is self- propelled, represent that object as causing the motion of the
object with which it collides (Mascalzoni et al., 2010; section 2 here). Future
experiments with still younger infants, or controlled-reared animals, could test
these possibilities further.5
Meanwhile, the research just described raises a further question: Will 3-
month-old infants who observe a person causing a change in an object on con-
tact show the Woodward effect? Sticky mittens experiments were motivated
by the finding that 3-month-old infants do not show the Woodward effect. Do
4 Indeed, the same film was used in all these experiments, digitally altered so as to equate all
sounds and timing across positions and rendering everyone except the infant wholly blind to the
infant’s condition.
5 A large literature has explored interrelations between action production and action perception
in monkeys (e.g., Rizzolatti et al., 1996), but relatively few studies have probed the nature and devel-
opment of processes of goal attribution in animals. At the time of this writing, there is evidence for
representations of reaching actions as goal-directed (in Woodward’s sense) and as efficient in relation
to environmental constraints (in Gergely’s sense) in untrained adult apes and monkeys (Wood et al.,
2007; Rochat et al., 2008) as well as dogs (Range, Viranyi, & Huber, 2007), but some of these findings
have been disputed (Hare et al., 2010), and none, to my knowledge, has been extended to infant ani-
mals. I discuss some of this research in section 6.
274 What Babies Know
they fail only because they do not view the reaching actions as causal? Or have
3- month-old infants also not yet learned that contacting an object usually is a
prelude to specific actions on the object, such as rolling a ball or cuddling a bear—
actions that depend on the object’s intrinsic properties, not its spatial location?
Brandon Woo, a grad student working in my lab, and Shari recently completed
experiments that begin to address these questions (Woo, Liu, & Spelke, 2021).
First, Brandon and Shari asked whether young infants will show the
Woodward effect if the actress causes a change in the object on contact. They
tested 3- month-old infants with a single change to the Woodward method: When
the actress’s hand contacted the goal object, during familiarization and test, both
objects lit up in synchrony with a sound (figure 7.5a).6 At test, however, infants
habituation(a) (b)
objects change positions
different object different position
test
habituation
objects change positions
different object different position
test
and
Figure 7.5 Displays for two experiments assessing 3-month-old infants’ ability to
infer the goal of an agent’s reach. Infants were habituated to events in which an actor
reached for one object (in this case, a ball) over another (a bear) and both objects lit
up changed color on contact with the hand; the objects occupied constant positions
in experiment 1 (a) and alternated between two positions at the center and one side
of the array in experiment 2 (b). Test events presented infants with the two objects
at the two side positions, and the actor alternately reached for the same object (in a
new position) or for the other object (in a familiar position). In (a), infants who had
seen only reaches to a single object and position treated reaches to the new object
and the new position as equally novel. In (b), infants who had seen reaches to a
single object at two positions expected reaches to that object at a third position at
test and treated reaches to the other object, at one of the two familiar positions, as
more novel. (Figure adapted from Woo et al., 2021.)
6 Experiments using Woodward’s method require that the same change occur in both objects si-
multaneously: If it did not, then infants might look longer at the test event in which the new object
lit up in synchrony with the sound, because it would be a novel event. In planning the study, we
wondered if the synchronous state changes of the two objects would present infants with an event
Agents 275
looked equally when her hand contacted the original object in the new posi-
tion and the new object in the original position. Infants still failed to show the
Woodward effect, providing evidence that causal information alone does not in-
dicate that the goal of a person’s reach is an object with particular affordances,
rather than an object at a particular location.
Accordingly, Brandon and Shari designed and undertook two further
experiments. For these studies, they modified the Woodward method in order
to present infants with reaches to two objects at three spatial positions. In the
first study (figure 7.5b), infants viewed an actor who reached consistently for a
ball (or, for half the infants, a bear). Across trials, the ball appeared alternately on
the left side of the display (or, for half the infants, the right side) and at the center
of the display, and so the actor alternately reached to one side and to the center.
Thus, the familiarization events suggest that it is the intrinsic properties of the
ball, and therefore its affordances, rather than its position, that make the ball the
goal of the actor’s reach.
At test, the two objects appeared on opposites sides of the display, with the
reached- for object occupying the novel position: In this example, the ball stood
on the right, where no object stood before, and the bear stood on the left, at a
now-familiar position. Throughout the study, both objects lit up and changed
color in synchrony with a sound when one object was touched. The 3-month- old
infants looked longer at the test event in which the person reached to the new
object at the familiar position than at the test event in which the person reached
to the original object at the novel position. Thus, the 3-month- old infants
represented the reach as directed to the object the actor had reached for previ-
ously, despite its novel position. Given information that clarified the goal of the
actor’s reach, infants appropriately inferred the actor’s object-directed intention.
Currently, we are testing whether 3-month- old infants can learn with equal ease
that an actor intends to reach for an object at a specific position, regardless of its
other properties and affordances.
In summary, the large and rich body of studies initiated by Woodward now
suggests that prereaching infants are sensitive to three abstract properties of
people’s acts of reaching: They view these acts as causal, as costly, and as goal-
directed. Without further information, however, prereaching infants do not as-
sume that people are more likely to reach for objects with particular forms and
that they either found anomalous, or that suggested to them that the two objects were connected.
Two prior findings suggested, however, that infants would not be affected by the correlated change in
the two objects. First, 4-month- old infants do not view synchronous state changes in two stationary
objects as evidence that the objects are connected (Jusczyk et al., 1999; chapter 2 here). Second, Liu
et al.’s (2019) experiments show that 3-month- old infants do not connect an act of reaching to a
change in the state of an object if the hand stops moving at a distance from the object. The findings to
be presented provide more direct evidence that infants were not perturbed or distracted by the syn-
chronous state changes.
276 What Babies Know
functions rather than for objects at particular positions. Thus, they are ignorant
of properties of people’s most common actions that we (and older infants) take
for granted. Brandon and Shari’s last experiment, however, provides evidence for
another key property of core knowledge systems: Infants’ abstract knowledge of
agents and their actions supports their learning. Over the course of a single ses-
sion, 3-month-old infants who viewed a person reaching for a single object in
two different locations learned that the goal of the person’s reach was to move
to that object, not to move to that location. Like the object and place systems,
infants’ abstract, early-emerging knowledge of people as agents supports their
learning about people’s actions and goals.
5 Do Infants Attribute Perceptions to Agents?
All interpretations of the experiments described in the previous two sections pre-
suppose that infants attribute to agents the ability to detect objects at a distance.
To adjust the height of their jumping to the height of a barrier that blocks their
direct path to an object, agents must detect the barrier and assess its height. To di-
rect a reach to an object, a person must detect the object and its location. If infants
did not make this assumption, then they could not expect agents either to plan
actions around barriers that they never contact or to direct their actions to dis-
tant goals. These considerations raise a question: Do infants assume that agents
are omniscient detectors of every object in a scene, or do they, like adults, expect
agents to detect surrounding objects under some conditions but not others?
Considerable evidence indicates that infants expect an agent to act only on
objects within its field of view, which in turn depends on its position and heading.
Recall that 6-month-old infants view a person’s movements as goal-directed only
when she faces in the direction in which she is moving (Johnson, Shimizu, &
Ok, 2007a; see also Csibra, 2008). Further experiments show that infants expect
people to move out of the path of an oncoming object when they face the ob-
ject but not when they face away from it. Kosugi and Fugita (2002) presented
8- month-old infants with events in which an object moved smoothly behind a
screen in the direction of a stationary, standing person, who was partly visible on
the far side of the screen: a similar arrangement to that at the top of figure 7.1c,
but reversing the positions of the object and the person. After habituation to this
event, the screen was removed, and infants viewed alternating events with and
without contact: displays like those at the middle and bottom of figure 7.1c, but
presented in two versions, with the stationary person facing either toward or
away from the moving person. When the person faced away from the silently
approaching object, infants expected the object to contact him. In contrast, when
the person faced the approaching object, infants expected him to begin to move
Agents 277
away before the object arrived (see also Woodward, Phillips, & Spelke, 1993).
Thus, infants expected the person to adapt his actions only to objects that would
have been visible to him.
Experiments by Yuyan Luo and her collaborators provide evidence that
young infants recognize that other agents’ detection of objects also is lim-
ited by occlusion. Her studies build on the finding that 5-month-old infants
show the Woodward effect when they reach for one of two objects but not
when they reach for the only available object in the scene (Luo & Baillargeon,
2005). Thus, the Woodward effect depends on evidence that the actor made
a choice between two possible goals (Luo & Baillargeon, 2005; see section
6). In one study, Luo asked whether infants would show the Woodward ef-
fect if two objects were present in the scene and the actor reached for one of
them, but only the chosen object was visible to the actor, who stood between
the objects and faced one of them. Infants did not show the Woodward effect
in this situation: When the unchosen object stood behind the actor’s back,
infants did not interpret the action as a choice between two options (Luo &
Johnson, 2009). In other studies, Luo tested for the Woodward effect when
the actor faced in the direction of two objects but one of the objects was oc-
cluded from the actor’s perspective (though both objects were visible to the
infant). Under these conditions, infants did not expect the actor to reach for
the chosen object after the barrier that blocked the actor’s view of the other
object was removed. These findings were replicated in 3-month-old infants
(Luo, 2011; see also Choi, Mou, & Luo, 2018).
The findings just described are open to two interpretations, because vari-
ations in an actor’s facing direction, and variations in the existence or position
of an occluder, influence not only what actors can see but what they can easily
do: It is more costly to reach for an object that stands behind one’s back or that
is positioned behind a barrier than for an object that stands before the actor, un-
obstructed. To determine whether infants attributed varying perceptions to the
agents in these experiments, further experiments have focused on a key signa-
ture of perception: Perceptual information in other modalities can compensate
for barriers to vision, but not for barriers to action. In studies of 12-month-old
infants, Luo showed that the Woodward effect could be restored if the agent had
the opportunity to feel the occluded object behind the screen (Luo & Baillargeon,
2007). Similarly, Kosugi’s studies showed that infants’ expectations concerning
actions of an agent who faces away from an approaching person can be modulated
by sound: The person’s voice can lead the agent to move out of the way (Kosugi &
Fugita, 2002). Thus, older infants’ expectations of object-directed action are mod-
ulated by the actor’s perceptual access to the goal object, whether by vision, touch,
or sound. Because the youngest infants tested in these studies were 5 months old,
the earlier development of these abilities is not clear. Controlled-reared chicks,
278 What Babies Know
however, avoid foraging in places that lie within the view of an unfamiliar, poten-
tial predator, providing evidence that aspects of these abilities are innate in one
species (Rosa Salva, Regolin, & Vallortigara, 2007).
Thus, infants as young as 3 months expect other agents to adapt their actions
only if the objects are perceptually accessible to them. Do infants further ex-
pect that agents will act on objects only if they look at them? Four lines of re-
search suggest that they do not. First, infants do not view another agent’s acts
of looking as directed to objects until the end of the first year: Infants do not
show a Woodward effect when presented with an actor who looks at one of two
objects (Woodward, 2003; Brune & Woodward, 2007; section 4).7 Second, older
infants integrate their representations of agents’ gaze direction, body orienta-
tion, and direction of action, but younger infants do not. When 12-month- old
infants view a body that is oriented in a particular direction, they expect that the
head and eyes also will face in that direction, combining their analysis of biolog-
ical motion with an analysis of gaze direction (Yoon & Johnson, 2009). Younger
infants, in contrast, fail even simple tasks assessing such integration: They expect
the eyes to be oriented in the same direction as the head but have no expectation
concerning the relative orientations of the eyes and head with the body (Gliga &
Dehaene- Lambertz, 2007).
Third, infants under 1 year of age do not use the direction of an agent’s gaze to
predict the direction of her goal-directed action. If a person looks at one of two
objects and then begins to reach as a curtain closes, 14-month- old infants expect
the actor to reach for the object at which she was looking, and 12-month- old
infants show emerging signs of this ability, but younger infants do not (Phillips,
Wellman, & Spelke, 2002; figure 7.6). Despite a year of experience with people
7 Several investigators have questioned Woodward’s conclusion. In one study, Johnson, Ok,
& Luo (2007b) showed that 9-month- old infants dishabituate to looking in the direction of a new
object if they are habituated to events in which an agent looks at the familiar object from a set of
varying positions. This task, however, can be solved by processes of pattern learning over the course
of the experiment: It may not reflect any general expectation that people look at objects. Luo (2010)
questioned Woodward’s interpretation on different grounds, arguing that young infants may under-
stand looking as object-directed but may view an act of looking at an object without reaching for it
as anomalous. However, Luo’s interpretation does not explain the developmental change observed
by Woodward (2003) and by Brune & Woodward (2007): If looking at an object without touching
it were anomalous, older infants should be equally or more sensitive to the anomaly. Luo’s interpre-
tation also cannot account for the findings of Beier & Spelke (2012), in which 9-month- old infants
fail to perceive gaze as goal-directed when an agent looks at another person (see chapter 8). As early
as 6 months, infants appreciate that people act on objects by reaching for them but act on people by
talking to them (Molina et al., 2004). Thus, when one person turns to look at and speak to one of two
people, infants should not find it anomalous that the person does not reach for the person toward
whom he is looking. Nevertheless, when an actor turned to look at and talk to one of two people,
infants under 10 months failed to perceive his action as goal-directed, consistent with Woodward’s
original interpretation. No finding, therefore, shows that infants construe acts of looking as
object- directed.
Agents 279
who tend strongly to look at the objects they act on, infants are remarkably ob-
livious to this cue. Fourth, infants do not begin to consistently follow the gaze of
an agent to an object until about 7 months of age. Until 10 months, moreover,
their gaze following depends on the agent’s head direction more than on his eyes.
When an agent turns to look at an object, infants are equally likely to turn to the
object if the agent’s eyes are open or closed (Brooks & Meltzoff, 2005), and until
14 months, they are equally likely to follow the gaze of a person wearing a head-
band with open, unobstructed eyes and a person wearing a blindfold that covers
his eyes (Brooks & Meltzoff, 2002).
These negative findings cannot be explained by limits to infants’ sensitivity or
attention to eyes and gaze direction. When newborn infants are presented with
two still photographs of a face, side by side, one with the eyes facing forward to-
ward the infant, the other with the eyes facing to the side, infants look longer at
the face with the direct gaze (Farroni et al., 2002). When the face first looks at
them and then looks to the side without turning the head, moreover, newborn
infants detect and follow this shift in gaze (Farroni et al., 2004). (I discuss these
Habituation
Test
Congruent with gaze Incongruent with gaze
Figure 7.6 Displays for an experiment testing infants’ predictions of object motion
from their direction of gaze and displays of emotion. During habituation, an actress
looked and smiled at one of two identical objects (top left) and, after the curtain
closed and reopened, she held the object at which she had looked (top right). At
test, she either looked in the same direction (bottom right) or the opposite direction
(bottom left) and was revealed, when the curtain opened, to be holding the object
that had been positioned in the new direction. Infants looked equally at these
events: They failed to predict the change in the person’s goal from the change in her
direction of gaze. (Reprinted from A. Phillips et al., 2002.)
280 What Babies Know
findings in chapter 8.)8 Thus, young infants perceive and attend both to an actor’s
gaze and to his object- directed actions but show little understanding of the rela-
tion between these two indicators of the actor’s intentions.
Although young infants do not predict agents’ actions from their direction
of gaze, I suggest— drawing on insights from computational models of action
understanding—that infants predict and interpret an agent’s actions by assessing
the contents of the agent’s visual field: the surfaces and objects that are visually
accessible, given the agent’s position and heading. Objects that are occluded
from the agent’s perspective lie outside his visual field (though the agent will de-
tect them if he hears or feels them), as are the backs of objects that face the agent
and the objects that lie behind the agent’s back. All features of the environment
within the visual field, however, may be considered by infants as potential targets
of the agent’s actions.
As adults, we often assume that people have seen things that are perceptually
accessible to them, without knowing where they are looking. If, while teaching a
class, I introduce and act on an object to demonstrate a point in the lecture, I do
not check the eyes of all the students to see if each is looking at the object. As
long as my demonstration is accessible to every student, I assume that everyone
has seen it. Experiments by Chris Baker, Rebecca Saxe, and Joshua Tenenbaum
(2017) show that adults make astute inferences about agents’ action plans and
mental states, using this assumption.
In summary, infants as young as 3 months attribute to agents the power to de-
tect objects at a distance, but they appear to fail to appreciate that agents only see
the things they look at. Although 3-month-old infants expect that an agent will
not act on an object that is occluded from her perspective, only at 12 months do
infants begin to expect that an agent will not act on a visually accessible object
toward which she has not looked. More deeply, infants below 12 months may
not view other agents as having perceptual experiences of objects like their own
(Meltzoff & Brooks, 2008). They may connect agents’ actions to their perceptual
access to objects but not to their experiences of objects. I return to this sugges-
tion in section 9.
8 In these studies, infants first see a still photograph with direct gaze, then the same pose with
averted gaze, and finally the face disappears and is replaced by an object positioned to the left or
right, either toward or away from the shift in gaze. Under such conditions, newborn infants tend to
fixate the object faster when it appears on the side of the shift in gaze (Farroni, Massaccesi, Pividori,
& Johnson, 2004; Nakato et al., 2009) as do older infants (Hood, Willen & Driver, 1998) and adults
(Driver et al., 1999). I discuss this research in chapter 8, because the evidence from these studies
suggests that this attentional effect pertains to infants’ representation of gaze as a sign of social en-
gagement, not as a cue to an agent’s object-directed action. In particular, the movements of attention
only occur when a face appears in a scene that is devoid of objects, and only when the face disappears
before the objects are presented.
Agents 281
6 Do Infants Attribute Desires, Knowledge, and Beliefs
to Agents?
As adults, we construe agents as acting in accord with their stable preferences
and their current desires and beliefs, as well as their perceptions. Accordingly,
experiments using Woodward’s method have asked whether infants interpret
another agent’s act of reaching as a manifestation of her desire for that object.9
Attributions of desires to an agent who repeatedly reaches for an object are
not unreasonable, even if the agent does nothing more with the object, as in a
Woodward paradigm, and even if infants learn over the course of habituation
that the agent does not intend to cause changes in the object she touches, as I pro-
pose. Selective touching of an object could be a signal that the object holds a priv-
ileged status for the agent, who wishes to be in contact with it.
One finding described in section 3 provides evidence for this possibility: After
watching a person reach repeatedly, but unsuccessfully, for a distant bear over a
distant ball, infants themselves choose to reach for the bear (Hamlin et al., 2008,
figure 7.3b). This effect cannot be attributed to imitation of the observed ac-
tion, because the person’s hand never arrived at the bear. Instead, it must reflect
infants’ reading of the person’s intentions (see also Brandone & Wellman, 2009,
and Meltzoff, 1995). The experiment therefore shows that infants inferred, from
a person’s behavior, that the bear was the intended goal of her action, and per-
haps the more valued object.
Selective reaching for one of two objects is not a particularly reliable indi-
cator of an actor’s desires, however, because people reach for objects for mul-
tiple reasons: not just to commune with the objects but to put them in their
proper place or throw them away. People also use objects as means to a diverse
ends: We grasp a doorknob because we wish to enter a room, and we head for
a movie theater to experience a desired activity, not to sit in a desirable audito-
rium. Consistent with these observations, 10-month- old infants, tested in the
Woodward paradigm, do not show the Woodward effect if critical information
about the goal of the agent’s reach is provided in a different room from that of
9 Some experiments using the Woodward paradigm, and aiming to test whether infants attribute
preferences or desires to people who act on objects, presented infants with one person reaching for
one of two objects during habituation and a different person reaching alternately to the two objects at
test. In one series of studies, infants did not generalize from one person to the other in this paradigm
(Buresh & Woodward, 2007). Infants do generalize from one person to another in other experiments
using this method, however (Csibra & Gergely, 2009). I will discuss these studies, and the opposite
effects they revealed, in chapter 8, but here note that regardless of whether or not habituation to one
person’s reaching generalizes to a second person, these studies do not bear on infants’ attributions
of desires or preferences to agents. Infants may generalize across people even if they think people’s
actions reveal their desires, if they also expect different people to want the same things. Moreover,
infants may fail to generalize across people even if they attribute no desires to them, if they realize
that different people sometimes act on the same object in different ways.
282 What Babies Know
the experiment itself (Sommerville & Crane, 2009). Infants may not assume that
actions by a person in one context will be guided by the same intentions in other
contexts.
Better evidence for a person’s desires comes from the effort she expends in
bringing about a goal state, from the risks of failure she is willing to assume, from
the collateral damage she is willing to risk for a chance to obtain her goal, and
from the opportunities she forgoes in pursuing her goal. Infants are sensitive to
the physical costs of an action (section 2). Here I ask whether they use this infor-
mation to infer the value, to an agent, of the goal state her actions aim to achieve.
Research by Shari Liu, working with Tomer Ullman, Joshua Tenenbaum and
me, addressed this question (Liu et al., 2017). In Shari’s first experiment, infants
were familiarized with four events, each involving the same agent and one of two
goal objects (figure 7.7). In two events, the agent appeared at the center of the
screen with one goal object to its left, a barrier fell on-screen between the agent
and the object, and the agent looked up and down the barrier. Then the agent
jumped efficiently over the barrier, reaching the object, in one event, and refused
to jump in the other event. The other two events involved the same agent begin-
ning in the same central position, accompanied by a different goal object on the
right. Again a barrier fell in front of the object, and the agent looked up and down
the barrier before jumping to the object in one event and not in the other (figure
Habituation
Test
Higher cost action
Goal value consistent with action cost Goal value inconsistent with action cost
Lower cost action
and
Figure 7.7 Displays from the first experiment by Liu et al. (2017). Infants were
familiarized with four events, in which an animated agent took a medium-cost
action and refused a high-cost action to get to one goal object (top left) and took a
low-cost action and refused a medium-cost action to get to the other (top right).
At test, both goal objects appeared together and the agent moved to each object on
alternating trials. Infants looked longer when the agent approached the object for
which it had taken the lower-cost action, providing evidence that they expected the
goal of the higher-cost action to have higher value. (Reproduced and adapted from
Liu et al., 2017.)
Agents 283
7.7, top). Thus, the infants saw the agent approach each object in one event and
refuse to do so in another event: Simple tracking of the agent’s choices to jump or
stay would suggest no preference between the objects.
The critical manipulation in the experiment concerned the heights of the
barriers, and therefore the relative costs of the agent’s actions. The agent jumped
a low barrier for one object and balked at a barrier of medium height; it jumped
the medium barrier for the other object and refused a high one. To determine
whether infants take account of these costs in inferring the agent’s future choices,
infants were tested with events in which the agent stood between the two objects
with no barriers and moved to each object in turn on alternating trials. Infants
looked longer when the agent moved to the object for which it had taken the
less costly action, providing evidence that this choice was unexpected. Thus, the
infants inferred the relative values of the two objects to the agent from the rela-
tive costs of the actions it performed to obtain them.
Shari’s finding provides further evidence that infants assess the relative costs
of actions of jumping over a barrier to obtain a goal object but does not reveal the
basis of infants’ cost evaluations. Do they depend on local features of the actions,
such as the length of the path the agent follows, or the duration or speed of his
motion? Alternatively, do infants have a more abstract and general representa-
tion of the effort an agent expends to arrive at an object? To begin to address this
question, Shari replicated the experiment with new actions. Instead of jumping
over barriers of three heights, the agent climbed ramps of equal lengths but dif-
ferent degrees of inclination: It climbed a shallow ramp and refused a moder-
ately inclined ramp leading to one object, and it climbed a moderate ramp and
refused a steep ramp leading to the other object. Then infants received the same
test events as in the first experiment. Although the lengths, speeds, and durations
of the four actions were equated, the 10-month- old infants expected the agent to
approach the object for which it had climbed a steeper ramp.
Because these two experiments both involved moving to a higher location for
one object than for the other, they raised the possibility that infants based their
action predictions on this local cue rather than on abstract cost calculations. In
a final experiment, therefore, infants viewed events in which the agent moved
to a goal object by jumping over trenches of variable width, interposed between
the agent and its goal. The agent jumped a narrow trench and refused a trench
of moderate width to get to one object, and jumped the moderate trench and
refused a wider trench to get to the other object. Thus the agent undertook jumps
of equal height but exerted greater force to get to one of the objects. After this fa-
miliarization, infants again expected the agent to approach the object for whom
it had taken the more costly action.
Three experiments, therefore, provide evidence that 10-month- old infants
attribute something like desires to agents: Infants infer that agents value more
284 What Babies Know
highly the goal states they work harder to achieve. We have attempted for sev-
eral years to test for this inference in younger infants, with limited success. In
one experiment, 6-month-old infants who were presented with the events from
our first experiment showed a marginally significant preference in the opposite
direction: They looked longer at the agent’s approach to the more highly valued
object. Because infants tend to look at events that confirm their expectations
when these expectations are developing and uncertain, it is possible that abili-
ties to infer goal values from action costs have begun to develop by the middle of
the first year. It is also possible that younger infants connect action costs to goal
values at all ages, but young infants lack the attentional and memory resources
that are needed to compare all the events in our experiments, which present each
infant with four different action choices toward two different goals, at three dif-
ferent levels of cost. At the time of this writing, therefore, the earlier development
of the utilitarian inferences made by 10-month- old infants is not clear.10
These studies also do not reveal whether infants endow agents with
experiences of desire and with its associated expressions of emotion. I reserve
detailed discussion of this question for chapter 8, as emotional expressions are
elicited and interpreted most readily in social contexts. To anticipate, infants do
appear to attribute phenomenal states to the people in their social world (see
Meltzoff, 2007). Many studies suggest, however, that young infants have only
limited and late-emerging abilities to connect the actions that agents direct to
objects, in nonsocial contexts, to their emotional states and expressions.
For example, infants do not expect an actor to reach to an object toward which
she has shown positive emotion until 12 months of age (Phillips, Wellman,
10 The research by Yuyan Luo and Renee Baillargeon (2005), discussed in section 5, has been
interpreted to show that younger infants make these inferences. They presented two groups of 5-
month-old infants with an agent—a self- propelled box—that moved repeatedly toward one object
on a puppet stage. In one condition, a second object was present, as in Woodward’s experiments; in
the other condition, only the agent and the single goal object were present. Although the behavior
of the agent was the same in the two conditions, its movement in the condition with two objects had
an opportunity cost: The agent could have moved to the other object and chose not to. In the second
condition, in contrast, the environment afforded no alternative action, so moving to the first object
carried no evident opportunity cost. In both conditions, infants were tested with events in which
the agent faced a choice between the two objects, whose positions were reversed. Only in the first
condition did infants look longer when the agent approached the new goal object. Infants’ analysis
of an agent’s behavior therefore depends on the alternatives that are available to the agent. On one
interpretation of this finding, young infants are sensitive to an agent’s opportunity costs, and they
infer that chosen objects have greater value if other options are available. If this interpretation is
correct, then 5-month- old infants infer the values of goal states from the costs of agents’ actions, as
do older infants. Further studies by Luo (2011) extend the evidence for this effect to 3-month- old
infants (Luo, 2011). However, alternative interpretations of Luo and Baillargeon’s (2005) findings can
be offered. Infants are strongly attracted to novel objects and may attribute this attraction to others.
Even if they take no account of opportunity costs and attribute equal value to the reached-for object
in both conditions, they may look longer at reaches to the new object in the two-object condition and
show high and equal looking at reaches to the two objects in the one-object habituation condition,
because the familiar object’s higher intrinsic value is offset by the value of exploring something new.
Other paradigms may be needed to investigate infants’ sensitivity to opportunity costs.
Agents 285
& Spelke, 2002, fig. 7.6; Sommerville & Crane, 2009). When a person faces
two objects, looks at one of the objects, and expresses positive emotion while
ignoring the other object, infants do not expect that the person will reach for that
object over the other one. Moreover, 10-month- old infants do not expect an arti-
ficial agent to express more positive emotion after successful jumps over a barrier
to a goal object (a mat on the floor), relative to jumps that fail (Skerry & Spelke,
2014), although such infants do expect the agent to express negative emotions
more strongly after failed than after successful actions (Skerry & Spelke, 2014;
Vaish, Grossman, & Woodward, 2008). Eight-month- old infants do not show
even the latter expectation, although they expect the agent to express negative
emotion if it is injured (Skerry & Spelke, 2014). Infants appear to have limited
abilities to attribute feelings of desire or expressions of happiness or satisfaction
to people who act on objects. I will show, in chapter 8, that infants are more sen-
sitive to emotional expressions in social contexts.
Do infants attribute beliefs to agents and use those beliefs to predict and in-
terpret their actions? A number of experiments have been interpreted as evi-
dence that infants and toddlers have these abilities as early as 6 or 7 months of
age (Kovacs, Téglás, & Endress, 2010; Southgate & Vernetti, 2014; see Scott &
Baillargeon, 2017, for review), but these findings have sometimes failed to rep-
licate in other labs (Poulin-Dubois et al., 2018; for a meta-analysis, see Holland
& Phillips, 2020), leaving the status of the evidence unclear. Here, however,
I note that even if all the successful studies included in the meta-analysis prove
to be replicable, they reveal limited abilities to reason about the mental states of
agents. They would provide evidence that 6- to 7-month- old infants predict and
interpret an agent’s object-directed actions in accord with the objects that have
been visible to the agent in the immediate past. They would not show, however,
that infants attribute to agents the beliefs that older children and adults attribute
to one another.
In summary, considerable research provides evidence that infants expect
agents to act to attain valued goal states by causing changes in objects that are
or were perceptually accessible to them. Little evidence suggests, however,
that infants endow agents with phenomenal perceptions of objects, desires for
objects, or the kinds of beliefs about objects that we attribute to agents as adults
and that support inferences about other agents’ experiences and behavior. It is
possible, however, that evidence for richer mental state inferences is lacking, be-
cause the demands these tasks place on attentive object tracking and working
memory are too difficult for infants to perform.
To consider this possibility further, I return to the core knowledge hypothesis.
The core object, place, and number systems have further properties that I have
not yet discussed in this chapter: They are ancient, early-emerging, invariant
over later development, automatically activated, and unconscious. If infants’
286 What Babies Know
early understanding of agents stems from a system of core knowledge, it should
have these properties. To shed further light on early reasoning about the mental
states of agents, therefore, I turn briefly to studies of nonhuman animals and
human adults.
7 Core Representations of Agents in Nonhuman Primates
The perceptual abilities underlying agent representations have a long evolu-
tionary history, for they are shared by a variety of infant animals (section 1).
Do nonhuman animals form interconnected representations of the causal effi-
cacy, efficiency, and goal-directedness of agents’ actions, as human infants do?
Moreover, do they reason about other agents’ mental states, and if so, how?
A large literature in neurophysiology provides evidence for homologous
representations of actions in human infants and both infant and adult monkeys.
Rizzolatti and his collaborators discovered a population of neurons (in regions of
the frontal and parietal cortex of monkeys) that are active both when a monkey
performs a specific action (for example, picking up an object with a pincer grip)
and when the monkey observes another monkey or human performing the same
action. Rizzolatti called them “mirror neurons” and studied their properties
(Rizzolatti et al., 1996; Rizzolatti & Arbib, 1998).
The behavior of these neurons in monkeys shows many of the signatures of
human infants’ agent representations (Iacoboni & Dapretto, 2006). In particular,
mirror neurons respond to motions that contact objects and effect changes in the
state of the objects: The neurons that are active when the monkey sees a person
pick up a small object are inactive if the person’s action is directed to the side of
the object. The neurons respond to actions of a monkey or human hand but not
to otherwise similar movements by an inanimate object. They respond to actions
that are biomechanically possible but not to impossible ones. They also respond
to actions on occluded objects, and the timing of their response provides evi-
dence that monkeys expect occluded actions on an object to be accompanied by
sounds. These findings, along with functional brain imaging studies on human
adults (e.g., Chong, Cunnington, Williams, Kanwisher, & Mattingley, 2008) sug-
gest that human infants’ abilities to identify agents and reason about their actions
are not unique to our species.
Concerning representations of object-directed actions, behavioral studies of
nonhuman primates reveal effects that converge with those found in behavioral
studies of human infants. Adult chimpanzees, monkeys, and tamarins represent
human acts of reaching for and grasping objects, but not motions of falling on or
looking at objects, as goal-directed (Hauser, Glynn, & Wood, 2007/2011; Wood
et al., 2007; Wood & Hauser, 2011; Hauser & Wood, 2011). Adult monkeys, like
Agents 287
3- month-old human infants, represent the act of reaching over a barrier as ef-
ficient, and they expect a direct reach after the barrier is removed. In contrast,
when an action is unfamiliar, its causal mechanisms are opaque, and it causes
no change in the state of the object (making a fist and bumping the top of the ob-
ject), monkeys show no expectation of a direct reach after removal of the barrier
(Rochat et al., 2008). Like prereaching human infants who view causally opaque
reaching actions outside their repertoire (Skerry et al., 2013), monkeys may be
unclear as to whether the actor is performing an instrumental act and, if so, for
what purpose.
Research on nonhuman primates plays a prominent role in theorizing about
what Premack and Woodruff (1978) called “theory of mind” (e.g., Krupenye et al.,
2016). Adult animals of many species are sensitive to other agents’ present and past
perceptual access to objects. For example, semi-free-ranging monkeys on the re-
search island of Cayo Santiago, Puerto Rico, are adept at stealing food from humans
who eat on the island, and their success depends on careful monitoring of humans’
perceptual access to their transgressions. Monkeys attempt to steal food more often
from the people who are least likely to see them, depending on the orientation of
each person’s body, face, and eyes and on the positioning of an occluder (Flombaum
& Santos, 2005). Like human infants, however, monkeys avoid food near a person
who cannot see it if the person would be able to hear the act of stealing (Santos,
Nissen, & Ferrugia, 2006).
Similar abilities have been found in studies of apes (e.g., Hare, Call, & Tomasello,
2001, 2006), dogs (Kaminski et al., 2009; Kundey et al., 2010), and birds (Emery &
Clayton, 2001; Stulp et al., 2009). Indeed, adult nonhuman primates and dogs, but
not wolves, are more skilled than the youngest human infants at following the gaze
of another monkey or human to objects (Povinelli & Eddy 1996; Hauser et al., 2007/
2011; Duranton, Range, & Viranyi, 2017), and adult dogs, but not chimpanzees, are
more adept than young infants at interpreting a person’s pointing gestures (Povinelli
et al., 1997; Kirchhofer et al., 2012). These abilities, though modulated by domesti-
cation, likely depend on learning (Povinelli & Eddy, 1996; Lampe et al., 2017).
Despite these abilities, there is no evidence that apes, monkeys, or dogs repre-
sent other agents’ distinctive experiences of the objects and events that are visible
both to them and to another agent (Apperly & Butterfill, 2009; J. Phillips et al.,
2020), although chimpanzees do take account of the past visual perspectives of
other agents in predicting their behavior (Krupenye et al., 2016). Studies of apes
and monkeys therefore are consistent with the claim that an ancient system of
agent representation takes account of agents’ perceptual access to objects but not
of their mental experiences.11
11 One challenge to the core knowledge thesis advanced in this chapter comes from a recent exper-
iment providing evidence that chimpanzees learn, from their own past experience looking through
288 What Babies Know
Consistent with that possibility, the sole experiment providing evidence
that chimpanzees anticipate the actions of an observed agent based only on the
agent’s past history of perceptual access to a hidden object used a human dressed
in an ape costume as the agent, and used an outcome measure involving no so-
cially consequential actions: anticipatory looking at the places to which the agent
might move (Krupenye et al., 2016). Neither this experiment nor the one showing
action predictions based on current goal visibility (Kano et al., 2019) shows that
apes represent the beliefs of other individuals, but both do show abilities compa-
rable to those found in human infants (section 7).
Do apes and monkeys reason about agents’ actions in accord with the same
interconnected, abstract concepts of causal efficacy, efficiency, and goal-
directedness as human infants? Tomasello (2008) proposed a fundamental
difference between the social reasoning of chimpanzees and human chil-
dren: Whereas children are predisposed to reason about mental states in coop-
erative contexts (for example, using pointing to inform an agent of the location
of an object she hasn’t noticed), chimpanzees are more likely to reason about
mental states in competitive contexts (for example, monitoring what a dominant
competitor can and cannot see, so as to take resources without his awareness).
Note, however, that the patterns of cooperation on which Tomasello focused
do not begin to arise in human children until the end of the first year: Younger
infants’ reasoning about actions centers on the actor’s causal intentions with re-
gard to objects. Contexts in which animals interpret another animal’s intentions
toward objects, rather than the animal’s social intentions, may call on just the
sort of action representations that infants form, centered on action cost, goal
value, and causal efficacy.
In particular, apes monitor the motivational states and perceptual access of
more dominant apes in determining whether they can safely approach a given
food item (Hare, Call, & Tomasello, 2001), and they may deliberately take
a transparent barrier that appears from a distance to be opaque, that another animal who faces the
barrier will also be able to see objects that stand behind it, in contrast to the performance of young
human infants, to be discussed in chapter 8 (Kano et al., 2019; see also Hare et al., 2001). These
apes, however, had extensive experience with competitive interactions with others under varying
conditions of perceptual access, so they likely were better prepared for this task than are human
infants.
A further challenge to the present thesis comes from experiments providing evidence that adult
monkeys do not represent another human agent's visual perspective automatically, as do human
adults and infants and as the core knowledge hypothesis predicts (Martin & Santos, 2014). Martin
and Santos suggest that automatic belief attribution may be unique to humans, but the species dif-
ference they found may have stemmed from the differing patterns of attention that the experiment
elicited in the two populations. In research at their field site, monkeys were never approached or
engaged by an agent who kindled their interest in the events that she went on to show. Thus, both
human infants and adult monkeys may track other agents’ changing perceptual access to an object
when they are motivated to attend to the agent, and neither may do so when they are not. Though
core knowledge is activated automatically, its activation is gated by attention.
Agents 289
inefficient routes to a resource that they wish to exploit without detection: a
strategy that presupposes that other apes will discern their intentions if they head
to a food source or potential mate efficiently (Hare, Call, & Tomasello, 2006).
Nevertheless, experiments probing the relationships between contact causality,
action efficiency, and goal value have not been conducted in other animals, to
my knowledge. It will be important to study these abilities in young animals
and evolutionarily more distant animals, like chicks. In addition to the strong
homologies in mechanisms for perceiving agents in infants of different species,
the hypothesis of a core agent system predicts homologous mechanisms for rea-
soning about agents’ mental states in human infants and other infant animals .
8 Core Representations of Agents in Human Adults
As in the case of representations of places and number, some of the most con-
vincing evidence for an abstract but limited and encapsulated core system of
agent representation comes from studies of human adults. I will pass over the
immense literature on the mechanisms of face perception (chapter 8 will provide
a brief review) and perception of biological motion (see chapter 6) and begin
with adults’ reasoning about the actions and mental states of agents, presented
as animated displays with few or no human attributes but described as in-
telligent beings. Like infants, adults expect agents to act with the intention of
causing changes in the world, so as to bring about valued goal states as efficiently
as possible (Ullman, 2015; Jara-Ettinger et al., 2016). Also like infants, adults’
predictions of the future actions of agents are guided by information about the
barriers to action that an agent must circumvent to reach a goal object (Baker
et al., 2009), the barriers to vision that block an agent’s perceptual access to a
goal object (Baker et al., 2017), and the persistence with which an agent pursues
its goal over movement of the goal object and other changes in the environment
(Gao, McCarthy, & Scholl, 2010).
Among languages with classifier systems—grammatical devices that distin-
guish among different types of nouns— some of the most common function
words distinguish agents from nonagentive objects. Because these classifiers
are obligatory in certain contexts, as is the use of one of the pronouns he, she,
or singular they, rather than it, when referring to a sentient being, Strickland
(2017) suggests that grammatical devices arose in languages because core
representations of agents allow for their rapid use by speakers and their rapid ac-
quisition by children. (See chapter 9 for more discussion.) These studies provide
evidence for qualitative similarities between the reasoning of adults and infants
but do not reveal whether any of our mature agent representations show the sig-
nature limits of core knowledge in other domains.
290 What Babies Know
Research by Ian Apperly and his collaborators addresses this question. They
conducted experiments similar to experiments on infants described in this
chapter (section 5), but performed with adults and older children, who were
tested under time pressure. In one set of studies (Samson et al., 2010; Surtees &
Apperly, 2012), adults and children were presented with images of a room with
walls that sometimes displayed disks, and with a human-like avatar, in profile,
facing one wall (figure 7.8a). In different conditions, participants determined as
(a)
(b)
Ambiguous Unambiguous
Wall
Table
600 ms 1800 ms
She sees
N You see
N
or
or or
Consistent Consistent
InconsistentInconsistent
Figure 7.8 Displays for experiments on adults' and children's representations of
(a) the perceptual access of another character to objects, and (b) the character's
distinctive experience of an object that is accessible both to him and to the
participant. In (a), participants were told on each trial to report what they saw, or
what an avatar saw (top images); in control conditions, the avatar was replaced by a
similarly sized block (bottom images). Both judgments were slower when the avatar
could not see all the dots that the participant saw. Judgments were unaffected by
the position of the block. In (b) numerals were visible both to the participant and
to the avatar throughout but designated different numbers for the participant and
the avatar on some trials. When the numbers seen by the avatar and the participant
differed, participants were slower to judge what the avatar saw than when the avatar,
and they, saw the same number. In contrast, judgments of what the participant
saw were as fast on these trials as on trials when the participant’s and the avatar’s
experiences were aligned, in contrast to their performance in (a). (Reprinted,
respectively, from Surtees & Apperly, 2012, and Surtees et al., 2012.)
Agents 291
quickly as possible either how many disks appeared in each room (i.e., how many
disks the participant could see) or how many disks were visible to the avatar.
The critical manipulation concerned the position of the disks relative to the
avatar. In some trials, the information accessible to the participant and to the av-
atar was the same: All the disks in the room were positioned within the avatar’s
view. In other trials, the information differed: Some of the disks appeared behind
the avatar’s back. With this arrangement, the investigators could compare adults’
and children’s abilities to report both on their own perspective and on the avatar’s
perspective. Moreover, the investigators could measure whether automatic de-
tection of one of these perspectives interfered with participant’s ability to report
on the other perspective.
The responses of the adults were particularly interesting, and I focus on them
here. Participants judged how many disks were visible to the avatar more quickly
when the avatar’s perspective coincided with their own, just as our communica-
tions with others are faster and easier when we and our communicative partners
see the same things (Keysar et al., 2000). Surprisingly, participants’ judgments of
the number of disks they themselves saw in each display also were faster when
their own perspective coincided with that of the avatar. Neither effect occurred
in control experiments, in which the avatar was replaced by an inanimate object.
Thus, adults automatically represent the objects that are visibly accessible to an-
other agent, even when that agent’s perspective is irrelevant to the task the adults
are performing, and even when the adults know that the other agent is not a real
animate being who can see or do anything. The adults’ assessments of what was
perceptually available to the avatar evidently depended on a mechanism that is
encapsulated both against knowledge of the current task demands and know-
ledge of the capacities of the other agent.
Further measures suggested that adults’ inferences about the avatar were un-
conscious: Adults typically were unaware of attending to the avatar’s perspec-
tive. In these respects, representations of agents resemble representations of the
entities formed by other systems of core knowledge, such as number (Apperly &
Butterfill, 2009). Apperly’s research provides evidence that the representations
that guide infants’ reasoning about the objects that are perceptually accessible
to an agent are present and functional in adults and operate automatically and
unconsciously.12
Further experiments by Apperly and his collaborators provide evidence for
an important limit to this automatic system: It supports inferences of perceptual
12 Surtees and Apperly did not manipulate participants’ attention to the visual field of the avatar in
these studies. If their experiments reveal a core agent system that has all the properties of core know-
ledge systems discussed in chapter 5, then the automatic activation of the avatar’s perspective should
not occur if participant’s attention were directed elsewhere: an untested prediction of the present core
knowledge hypothesis.
292 What Babies Know
access but not attributions of perceptual experience. Surtees, Butterfill, & Apperly
(2012) presented adults with an avatar in a room containing a single Arabic nu-
meral that was visible both to the participant and to the avatar. On some trials,
the numeral appeared on a wall and thus had the same orientation for the partic-
ipant and the avatar. On other trials, the numeral appeared on a table, such that
its top from the participant’s perspective appeared as its bottom from the avatar’s
perspective (figure 7.8b). On congruent trials, the numeral was invariant over in-
version and therefore depicted the same number for both the participant and the
avatar (e.g., 8). On incongruent trials, the numeral changed with inversion (e.g.,
6/ 9), and so the avatar and the participant experienced the same written pattern
as different numerals. Once again, participants either had to report the number
they saw or the number seen by the avatar.
Not surprisingly, judgments of the number seen by the avatar were faster
when the participant perceived the same numeral. In contrast to the previous
study, however, judgments of the number seen by the participants were equally
fast on congruent and incongruent trials. Thus, adults showed no automatic ac-
tivation of the avatar’s differing experience of the written pattern that was vis-
ible to both of them. Like infants, adults form rapid, automatic, unconscious
representations of another agent’s visual access to an object but do not form auto-
matic representations of another agent’s experience of that object.
The limits to automatic encoding of an agent’s perspective are especially
striking in the studies of adults, because the adults clearly knew that the “agent”
in these studies did not see the same number 6 that they saw: Indeed, they re-
ported on this fact in one condition of the experiment. Nevertheless, the same
numerical symbol was visible to the participant and the avatar. Although
participants knew that a person at the avatar’s position would interpret that
symbol differently, their knowledge did not affect their rapid, automatic system
of agent representation. Surtees and collaborators’ (2012) experiments show that
adults’ automatic activation of representations of another agent’s perspective has
a signature limit: Adults quickly compute what is visually accessible to an agent
but not what the world looks like from the agent’s perspective.
Together, studies of animals and of human adults, viewed through the lens
of the core knowledge hypothesis, support two suggestions concerning infants’
representations of the mental states of agents. First, although studies of infants’
“theory of mind” have been difficult to replicate, their central finding—that
infants take account of an agent’s past access to an object in predicting the agent’s
future actions on that object—is likely correct, because this ability is present
in human adults and nonhuman animals as well as in some studies of infants,
where it shares the signatures of systems of core knowledge. Second, despite this
ability, there may be a critical limit to infants’ and animals’ knowledge of the
mental states of agents: a limit that has been difficult to test for in studies of these
Agents 293
populations. Although adults make automatic judgments about what objects
are perceptually accessible to another agent, they make no automatic judgments
about what another agent can experience. Such judgments also may lie beyond
the capacities of animals and infants, who may construe agents as beings who act
on perceptually accessible objects but possibly not as beings who experience the
world in ways that are both like and unlike the infant’s own experiences of the
same objects.
9 From Adults to Toddlers: A Possible Limit to Core
Representations of the Mental States Guiding Object-
Directed Actions
These possibilities have inspired new research by Brandon Woo. Brandon has
conducted a series of experiments that present 14- to 15- month- old toddlers
with a setup like that of Surtees and collaborators (2012), using pairs of pictures
of faces instead of number symbols, lying on a horizontal surface between the
toddler and a human actor, positioned opposite the toddler during habituation,
and directly in front of the toddler, on the opposite side of the room, at test (Woo
& Spelke, 2021). One experiment tested the first suggestion made earlier, that
toddlers will track what is and is not visible to another person, even when that
person’s perspective differs from their own (see figure 7.9a). During familiariza-
tion, the actor faced the toddler, and after both viewed both faces, occluders were
positioned so that one face remained visible to the toddler but not to the actor,
and the other face remained visible to the actor but not the toddler. In familiar-
ization, half the infants saw the actor consistently point to the picture that was
visible to him; the others saw him consistently point to the screen that occluded
the other picture from his view. Then the actor moved to the toddler’s side of the
room at test and pointed to the newly visible picture and to the screen that oc-
cluded the other picture, on alternating trials. Toddlers’ looking times provided
evidence that they expected the actor to point consistently from his perspective,
not from their perspective. If he had pointed to the object that was visually acces-
sible to him (and not to the toddler) during familiarization, then he should con-
tinue to point to the object that was visible to him (and now also to the toddler)
at test. This finding accords with the evidence that infants are sensitive to other
agents’ perceptual access to objects, although the participants in this study were
considerably older than the infants in the studies described in section 5.
Brandon’s next experiments tested for the mental state inferences of percep-
tual experience that adults make explicitly but fail to make implicitly when their
task demands a rapid response. In one experiment, the same actor viewed the
same faces, first from the opposite side of the room and then, at test, from the
294 What Babies Know
toddler’s side of the room. In this study, both faces were visible to both the actor
and the toddler throughout the study; what varied was their orientation. During
familiarization, the face that was upright from the actor’s perspective was in-
verted from the toddler’s perspective, and the face that was inverted to the actor
was upright to the toddler (figures 7.9b and 7.9c). The actor consistently pointed
to pictured faces at one of these two orientations: for half the infants, the face
that was upright to him. At test, the actor’s perspective on the pictures reversed
when he moved to the opposite side of the room, as it did in the first experiment.
In contrast to their performance in the first experiment, toddlers systematically
(a) (b) (c)
Occluded or visible faces Upright or inverted faces Rotation of faces
familiarizationtest
Figure 7.9 Displays for three experiments assessing 14- to 15-month-old toddlers’
representations of object goals. In experiment 1 (a, top), toddlers were familiarized
to events in which an actor pointed consistently to pictures of faces that were either
visible or occluded to him. Because he faced the child, the picture that was visible
to him was occluded for the toddler, and the reverse. In test trials, the actor moved
to the other side of the room (a, middle) and then pointed, on alternating trials,
to pictures that were of the same visibility to the toddler or to himself (a, bottom).
Infants looked longer when the actor’s behavior was inconsistent from the actor’s
perspective: a non-egocentric response. In experiment 2 (b) both faces were visible
in opposite orientations. During familiarization, the actor reached consistently
for pictures of faces that were either upright or upside-down to him, and therefore
were seen by the toddler at the opposite orientation. Then he moved to the toddler’s
side of the room and reached, on alternating trials, to faces at the same orientation
to the toddler or to himself. Toddlers showed the opposite looking pattern to
experiment 1, providing evidence that they interpreted the actor’s action from their
own perspective. Displays in experiment 3 (c) were the same as those of experiment
2, except that the actor reached only for faces that were inverted to him during
familiarization, and rotated the faces so that they became upright to him. Toddlers
still interpreted the actor’s action in accord with their own perspective. (The images
in a and b are reproduced from Woo and Spelke, 2021b.)
Agents 295
predicted that the actor’s actions (of reaching for or rotating a picture) would ac-
cord with their own perspective on the pictures and not with the perspective of
the actor. For example, if the actor, during familiarization, reached to the picture
that was upright from his own perspective, toddlers expected him, after moving
to their side of the room, to reach to the picture that was inverted from his own
perspective at test, ignoring the change in the actor’s perspective on the picture
and consistent with the toddler’s perspective throughout the study. Across mul-
tiple experiments that followed our initial report, varying the actor’s actions
(e.g., reaching to and touching a picture vs. reaching to and rotating the picture
to a different orientation), the degree of orientation change (full vs. partial in-
version) and the nature of the pictures that elicited different experiences at dif-
ferent orientations (photographed human faces vs. line-drawn faces and heads
of animals), infants have consistently failed to track the actor’s experiences of the
pictures. Their behavior on this task accorded with the performance of Apperly’s
adults on his speeded tasks.
These studies of toddlers cast doubt on the ability of infants to endow people
who act on objects with distinctive experiences of things and events. Infants may
fail to appreciate that different agents can experience the same object or event
in different ways. If these suggestions are correct, then when other people act
on objects in a situation involving no social communication, young infants will
not endow them with minds of the sort that older children and adults explicitly
attribute to one another. Studies of nonhuman animals, and of human adults en-
gaged in tasks that elicit automatic activation of an agent’s perspective, all suggest
this limit to core representations of agents’ mental states. I return to this limit in
chapter 8, where research suggests that infants attribute different mental states to
people who engage with other people instead of acting on objects.
10 Core Knowledge of Agency
In this chapter, I reviewed the large and rich literature on infants’ understanding
of the object-directed actions of people and animals through the lens of the core
knowledge hypothesis. Although the findings of research in this domain point
in multiple directions, I believe they lend credence to the view that infants have
a unitary, limited system for representing agents’ actions. At 3 months, infants
reason about people’s actions by drawing on abstract, interconnected concepts
of causal efficacy, efficiency, goal- directedness, and perceptual access. They expect
minimally costly actions only from beings that cause their own movement. If an
agent acts on one of two objects, infants infer that he chose that object over the
other object only if both objects are perceptually accessible, regardless of whether
the agent ever looked at the chosen object. Young infants also infer that agents
296 What Babies Know
have achieved their goals only when their efficient movements cause a change in
the state of the goal object on contact. Although the infants in these studies have
3 months of postnatal experience, they exhibit all these abilities before they can
engage in the actions they see others perform, and—as far as we can tell—before
they have developed any specific knowledge about the actions they observe, in-
cluding the highly frequent pick-up actions performed by adults. Before infants
manifest any understanding of the mechanics of object-directed reaching, they
understand that reaching, like other actions, is costly, causal, goal-directed, and
perceptually guided.
Like other highly useful, early-emerging abstract concepts, the infant’s
concepts persist in adults, where they operate automatically and unconsciously.
As adults, we cannot help perceiving animate agents in classic animations, where
balls and triangles with no faces or animal bodies move and interact by pursuing
goals, constrained by environmental barriers to action and to vision (Heider &
Simmel, 1944). We also cannot help activating representations of what is visible
to another agent, even when those representations interfere with the task we are
performing, and even when we do not believe the agent is real. Our core system
of agent representation therefore appears to be encapsulated.
Throughout the first year, infants’ representations of agents show limits like
those that characterize other modular, core knowledge systems. Infants use
some, but not all, of the information about people that they detect in representing
people’s actions and inferring their mental states. In particular, young infants
fail to take account of people’s emotional expressions or direction of gaze in
predicting and interpreting their actions, even though they detect this infor-
mation and use it, from birth, to identify people as social partners (chapter 8).
Infants also fail to distinguish their own changing experiences of faces, when
the faces are rotated, from the experiences of an agent who views the same faces
at the opposite orientation. If a core agent system underlies infants’ reasoning
about agents, these findings suggest that the system fails to capture the mental
states of perception and emotion that we and others consciously experience. The
best evidence for this conclusion comes from studies of adults, whose encapsu-
lated system of agent representation shows just this limit (Surtees et al., 2012,
figure 7.8).
Where tested, the system of agent representation has been found to be ancient,
though the evidence for this property is largely indirect. Although newborn
infants are highly sensitive to the distinction between photographed faces with
direct and averted gaze, and between upright and inverted patterns of biological
motion, newborn infants show no preference for a human face over the face of
a sheep, and no preference for a human walker over a walking hen. Moreover,
controlled-reared chicks preferentially imprint to the patterns that human
infants prefer. These findings suggest that perceptual mechanisms for identifying
Agents 297
agents evolved in ancestors that humans share with a wide range of other
vertebrates. Nevertheless, many aspects of human infants’ action representations
have been tested only in monkeys: Studies of these abilities in other mammals,
birds, and fish are a task for the future.
The evidence for the innateness of infants’ knowledge of agents also is lim-
ited. Newly hatched chicks attribute causal powers to entities that initiate their
motion spontaneously and cause changes in the motion of an object on contact.
To my knowledge, however, no evidence suggests whether any controlled-reared
animal expects agents to act efficiently or to direct their actions to distant but
perceptually accessible goals: more tasks for future research.
Finally, the core agent system supports learning. In one short labora-
tory session, the 3-month-old infants in Brandon Woo and Shari Liu’s exper-
iment learned that the goal of an agent’s action was an object with particular
affordances, not a location in space, and the participants in the experiments
by Amy Needham, Jessica Sommerville, and Amanda Woodward learned that
Velcro mittens can entrain certain objects on contact. In chapters 9 and 10,
I hypothesize that the core agent system also comes to support uniquely human
cognitive achievements, including language learning and new ways of learning
about the world by engaging with other people and sharing their experiences of
objects. Such learning only occurs, however, at the end of the first year.
Together, the properties of the agent system distinguish it both from percep-
tual systems and from the belief systems that underlie our explicit reasoning.
How might this system relate to the other core systems that occupy this middle
ground? The research described in this chapter suggests that core knowledge
of agents closely connects to core knowledge of objects. In support of such
connections, functional neuroimaging of adults reveals that common cortical
areas are activated when we reason about objects and plan actions (Schwettman,
Tenenbaum, & Kanwisher, 2019). As early as 3 months of age, infants appreciate
that agents’ actions are constrained by the objects that serve as obstacles to their
goals. They also represent agents as intending to cause changes in objects on con-
tact. These findings suggest that infants endow both agents and their goal objects
with all the abstract properties of the core object system, and that infants use
these properties in reasoning about the physical constraints on agents and their
actions.
Despite these relationships, the core object and agent systems function with
a large degree of independence, and they compete for attention when they are
applied to the same object or event. This competition is seen most clearly in the
experiments in which infants infer that a secret agent has set an object in motion
(Saxe et al., 2005). When an object flies through a scene, efficiently circumventing
an obstacle, infants perceive it as an agent if it has animate features and has pre-
viously engaged in spontaneous, apparently self-propelled motion. If those
298 What Babies Know
features are absent and no animate motion occurs, however, then infants repre-
sent it as an inanimate object and attribute its motion to another, hidden agent.
In these cases, the same entity in a scene may be represented either as an agent or
as an inanimate object, but not both. The assignment of bodies to these catego-
ries gives agents and objects distinct, complementary roles in accounting for the
events infants see.
If the form system, discussed in chapter 6, applies to all living beings, then the
agent and form systems have overlapping domains. Like the agent and object
systems, however, representations of plants and animals are distinct. The agent
system focuses on animals’ actions, intentions, and plans, whereas the form
system may initially focus on living bodies and the structures they generate as
they grow. Like the object system, the agent system activates neural mechanisms
in frontal and parietal cortex, not in areas that process information about object
forms. If form representations serve as the basis for aspects of our intuitive bi-
ology, ecology, and geometry, agent representations may serve as the basis for
aspects of our intuitive psychology.
The research described in this chapter raises further questions. First, how rich
is the innate system of reasoning about agents and their actions? Adults, chil-
dren, and 10- month-old infants interpret agents’ actions in accord with an in-
tuitive utility calculus: We view agents as planning actions that maximize the
rewards that they expect while minimizing the costs that they anticipate, given
the objects and obstacles that are perceptually accessible to them (Baker et al.,
2009; Jara-Ettinger, 2016; Liu et al., 2017). At 3 months of age, infants interpret
agents’ actions as causal, costly, efficient, and directed to perceptually acces-
sible objects. No research yet reveals, however, whether prereaching infants or
controlled-reared animals infer the value of goal objects to an agent from the cost
of the agent’s actions.
Second, by what processes do infants make sense of the behavior of agents,
and how do these processes arise? One theory of action understanding proposes
that our reasoning about agents centers on a generative model of action planning
(Baker et al., 2009, 2017; Ullman, 2015; see Ullman & Tenenbaum, 2020, for dis-
cussion). When we see a person who engages in a specific series of actions in
an environment that affords many other actions, we may infer both her action
plans and her goals and knowledge states by imagining actions that she could
have taken but didn’t, and by imagining how her actions would vary if her goal
changed or she detected different objects. Such models can account for infants’
reasoning about agents in diverse experiments (Ullman et al., 2013; Skerry
et al., 2013; Liu et al., 2017; Ullman & Tenenbaum, 2020). To my knowledge,
however, there is no direct evidence for these processes, parallel to the evidence
that animals simulate patterns of optic flow that accompany their movements
( chapter 1) or that animals and people simulate possible paths through the
Agents 299
navigable environment (chapter 3). The processes that produce core knowledge
of agents, and that use this knowledge to infer the mental states that guide agents’
actions, call for further study.
A final question that this chapter has not addressed concerns infants’ rea-
soning about events involving multiple agents. In all the studies reviewed in
this chapter, infants were presented with a single agent whose actions caused
changes in one or more inanimate objects. When agents direct their actions to
other agents, their actions differ in striking ways from the actions described in
this chapter. First, agents’ interactions with other agents are not limited to acts
that bring the agents into contact, because people and animals can perceive and
communicate with one another at a distance. Second, such social interactions are
not as tightly constrained by physical obstacles as are actions on objects: People
and animals can communicate through walls or other barriers. Third, social
interactions often involve behaviors that have no direct causal effects on the
world, such as vocalizing and gesturing. Finally, social interactions are strongly
modulated by expressions of emotion and other experiences. In the next chapter,
I ask whether infants are endowed with a sixth core system that represents the so-
cial engagements, mental experiences, and relationships among people, and that
guides infants’ learning to navigate their social world.
