What Babies Know. Elizabeth S. Spelke, Oxford University Press. © Elizabeth S. Spelke 2022.

Core Knowledge
Table 5.1 lists the properties of the three core knowledge systems discussed in
the previous chapters, together with the systems that were found to exhibit them.
The core systems for representing objects, places, and number center on inter-
connected abstract concepts, they operate on a limited domain of entities, and
they capture only a limited subset of the properties that our perceptual systems
deliver. These systems also are encapsulated, automatically activated, and un-
conscious, yet they are active only when we attend to entities in their domain.
Where tested, these core knowledge systems emerge early in ontogeny and func-
tion throughout life, and they are present in people of all ages and in all cultures.
Both during and after infancy, they guide our thinking and learning. Moreover,
the same abilities and limits are found in a wide range of animals and depend on
homologous brain systems and processes across those animals, providing evi-
dence that core systems emerged deep in our evolutionary past. At least one of
these systems— the place system—is innate and functions, in part, by generating
unconscious, rapid mental simulations of past and potential future events. Some
evidence suggests that the object system also is innate, and it may function in the
same manner.
In this table, I have attached particular core systems to these properties con-
servatively. I do not attribute deep phylogenetic origins to the object system, de-
spite extensive evidence that controlled-reared chicks have object representations
with all the properties found in older human infants. The experiments with
chicks show that abilities to track objects over occlusion and to anticipate the
effects of their collisions with other objects can emerge in animals who have
never seen these events. They do not show convincingly, however, that the
representations recruited by chicks are fully homologous to the representations
of inanimate, manipulable objects studied in human infants. I also do not in-
clude innateness as a property of the number system, despite the evidence for
amodal representations of numerical magnitudes in newborn human infants.
The innateness of the core number system is difficult to determine, because it
applies to sets of diverse entities, likely including the sounds and movements by
the mother that fetuses experience in the womb.
I now will argue, however, that the properties in table 5.1 go together: They
are different facets of a single kind of cognitive system. First, ancient systems
of knowledge, that emerged in ancestors common to humans and many other
Table 5.1 Properties of the core object, place, and number systems
1. Content: Interconnected, abstract concepts
Objects: cohesion, continuity, solidity, action on contact
Places: distances and directions on the ground
Number: relative magnitudes, set composition
2. Domain: A subset of the entities that are perceived
Objects: bodies, not nonsolid substances or 2D forms
Places: the ground and its borders, not other surfaces or objects
Number: arrays or sequences of entities or events, not trackable objects
3. Inputs: A subset of the properties that are perceived
Objects: surface positions and motions, not textures, colors, or shapes
Places: the geometry of the ground surface, not its texture or markings
Number: discrete, not continuous, quantity
4. Architecture: Encapsulated
Objects: infants fail to track objects by their forms and functions
Places: children fail to reorient by objects that they use as landmarks
Number: infants fail to enumerate objects that they track as individuals
5. Operation: Automatic and unconscious
Objects: adults spontaneously track attended objects without awareness
Places: adults unconsciously update their position as they navigate
Number: adults compare and combine sets with no awareness of number
6. Activation: Dependent on attention
Objects: attentive tracking of each individual object
Places: attentive action planning for navigation
Number: attention to groups of objects or events
7. Ontogeny: Early-emerging and developmentally invariant
Objects: common abilities and limitations in infants and adults
Places: navigation by layout geometry in infant animals, children, and adults
Number: representations of approximate number at all ages
8. Phylogeny: Ancient
Places: common behavioral and neural properties in humans and rodents
Number: common behavioral and neural properties in humans and monkeys
9. Scope: Widespread across human cultures
Places: shared intuitions of geometry in diverse cultures
Number: a sense of numerical magnitude in all tested cultures
10. Function: First and foremost, core systems support learning
Objects: learning about object kinds and intuitive physics
Places: learning the layout of the local environment
Number: statistical learning of diverse properties of objects and events
11. Origins: Innate
Objects: partly innate in human newborns; innate in chicks
Places: innate in rodents and chicks
12. Operation: In part, by mental simulation
Places: simulations of movement over the ground
192 What Babies Know
animals, will strongly tend to focus on abstract properties and relations. To see
why, let’s go back some 400 million years and consider the last common an-
cestor of humans and zebrafish, who navigated by the distances and directions
of perturbations, drop-offs, and borders on the ocean floor. This ancestor may
have lived in a part of the ocean where other environmental features also served
as landmarks or directional beacons: Perhaps a chemical gradient in the water,
produced by a moderately distant sulfur spring, served to indicate the direction
of a significant food source. If the creature’s species and environment persisted
long enough, then our ancestor likely was endowed, by prior processes of natural
selection, with capacities to navigate both by the contours of the ocean floor and
by the sulfur gradient. But now consider its descendants. As they colonized other
regions of the ocean or moved to land, sulfur gradients ceased to abound, but the
contours of the ground over which fish swam, frogs leaped, and birds flew still
obeyed the laws of geometry, which remained a reliable guide to where things
are. These geometric properties apply to all habitable environments.
The same principle holds for the abstract properties that are captured by
other systems of core knowledge, including the spatiotemporal continuity of
object motion and the laws of arithmetic. These aspects of our intuitive physics
and mathematics apply to all the environments inhabited by insects, fish, and
vertebrates like us. When a system for representing such properties emerges in
a distant ancestor of contemporary animals, it will continue to be selected for,
however the animals and their environments change. Mutations that impair the
functioning of such a system will be selected against, because the unfortunate
animals who possess mutations to the object, place, or number system will fail to
anticipate and avoid the oncoming rock, to return home after their first outward
journey, or to learn where they are likely to find more food and fewer predators.
The abstract concepts at the center of our oldest cognitive systems constitute
a primordial “blessing of abstraction,”1 counter to long-standing intuitions con-
cerning what is learned or innate, and what is unique to our species or shared
by other animals. For millennia, thinkers have supposed that knowledge begins
with modality-specific sensations and culminates in abstract concepts only late
in ontogeny and phylogeny. Multidisciplinary research in the developmental
cognitive sciences turns this assumption on its head. Although we do not rou-
tinely articulate our abstract concepts, they are foundations for learning about
things, places, and events at all ages and in a wide range of species. Ancient cog-
nitive systems capture properties of the world that apply to all the diverse envir-
onments in which these creatures live.
1 I borrow this compelling expression from Goodman, Ullman, & Tenenbaum (2011), who pro-
posed that abstract concepts are favored by learning systems for similar reasons. Their thinking pre-
ceded and greatly influenced the arguments in this chapter.
Core Knowledge 193
The long evolutionary history of core knowledge systems also may explain
why these systems are encapsulated. Since the ancestors in which core know-
ledge first arose lacked our highly plastic neocortex, this knowledge likely
depended on mechanisms that are homologous either to older cortical structures
such as the hippocampus or to subcortical structures. With the emergence of the
neocortex, these lower brain regions would have been vulnerable to top-down
activity that could have impaired their functioning, because neocortical regions
communicate widely with one another, through both short- and long-distance
connections, and throughout life, cortical connections are shaped by this ac-
tivity. To allow our more ancient neural systems to function without interfer-
ence, and thereby to structure and guide learning by the cortical systems, the
evolution of the brain would have favored their encapsulation.
As a consequence, core systems operate unconsciously in human adults and
children, and likely in infants and animals as well. Dehaene and Changeux
(2005) hypothesized that brain processes reach consciousness when activity in
one neocortical region passes a threshold and activates a unitary, massive pattern
of reverberating activity across a widespread network that they call the “global
workspace.” (For review, see Dehaene, 2014.) In animals with a neocortex like
ours, activity in the global workspace likely underlies our conscious experience
of places, numbers, and objects, as that experience has been enriched by a life-
time of learning. If core knowledge systems reside in encapsulated, subcortical
structures that are impervious to the activity in the cortical, global workspace,
then the representations and processes they generate will be inaccessible to con-
scious reflection. To activate each core system, however, adults, infants, and ani-
mals must attend to the individual objects they track, the acts of navigation they
plan, or the sets of objects or events they compare and combine. Limits on at-
tentional resources likely ensure that each system is activated when needed and
suppressed when other systems are needed more.
Because the core knowledge systems focus on abstract properties of objects,
places, and groups of entities, these systems will continue to function in children
and adults in all cultures, for at least three reasons. First, the primordial blessing
of abstraction has produced systems that can function in any environment that
supports life for humans and for the animals who share these systems with us. It
follows that we will never outgrow their usefulness: People at all ages, living in all
environments that humans inhabit and all the cultures that we collectively create,
will continue to draw on these systems when we track objects, plan trips, or esti-
mate the shortest checkout lane at the supermarket.
Second, because the systems are encapsulated, they continue to function re-
gardless of our explicit beliefs and desires. Science fiction enthusiasts may de-
light in games and movies allowing time travel or teleportation, and physicists
teach us that spatiotemporal continuity, solidity, and action on contact do not
194 What Babies Know
apply at scales that are very large or small. Nevertheless, their core object system
will continue to simulate continuous motions and forward causal interactions,
because core knowledge systems are not affected by these beliefs.
Third, children’s core systems support their learning. Equipped with the ab-
stract properties captured by core knowledge, babies can single out entities in
each core domain and learn about their further properties and behavior. By
using object continuity and solidity to track objects over time and occlusion, for
example, babies may learn that objects also tend to be uniform and persisting
in substance and texture, and that objects with similar forms tend to have sim-
ilar functions. Joshua Tenenbaum and his collaborators (Goodman, Ullman, &
Tenenbaum, 2011; Tenenbaum et al., 2011) noted that such learning will benefit
from another blessing of abstraction: It will privilege more abstract and general
properties of these entities, such as those just mentioned, over more concrete and
specific properties of the entities, because evidence for abstract properties comes
from a broader array of experiences. Only experiences with goldfish provide ev-
idence that goldfish are orange, but experiences with any fish provide evidence
that goldfish have fins and swim in water, and experiences with any animal pro-
vide evidence that goldfish grow, eat, and move themselves from place to place.
With these insights, the computational and developmental cognitive sciences
are overturning the traditional view that human knowledge begins with specific
sensory-motor experiences and arrives at abstract concepts only at its pinnacle.
By combining the two blessings of abstraction, children’s learning is likely to pro-
duce hierarchies of concepts and beliefs that grow around a constant core, be-
ginning with the most abstract concepts and favoring, at every point in learning,
more abstract properties and relations over more concrete ones (Ullman &
Tenenbaum, 2020). Because core knowledge is unconscious, however, it captures
the abstract concepts and relations that we take for granted and need not think
about directly.
Finally, the ancient core knowledge systems are likely to be innate, for two
reasons. First, abstract properties are hard to learn. Consider, for example, the
spatiotemporal continuity of object motion. Spatiotemporal continuity is true
of the movements of the middle-sized objects that animals act on and track, but
it is not true of the sensory information that animals receive from those objects
as they move through cluttered environments. Without innate mechanisms that
extrapolate continuous paths of motion from our discontinuous encounters with
objects, it is not clear how the continuity of object motion would ever be learned.
Fortunately, adults and infants are built to perceive continuously moving objects,
as are chicks (Wood & Wood, 2018).
Second, some animals need these ancient systems to function from the be-
ginning. Although human infants are dependent on others for their survival
throughout the first year, many other animals, who share our core knowledge
Core Knowledge 195
systems, must fend for themselves. They must move on their own, avoid drop-
offs and obstacles, find food, steer clear of predators, and find their way home
the first time they leave the nest to forage. To accomplish these feats, these an-
imals need core systems that function at birth and guide their earliest actions.
Consistent with this requirement, research on young rats provides evidence
that the basic neural processes found in experienced navigators are present and
functional when rats first begin to navigate, and research on controlled-reared
chicks, whose navigation performance is highly similar to that of human chil-
dren, provides evidence that some behavioral capacities for navigating in accord
with the geometric structure of the environment are present and functional on
the chick’s first encounters with a geometrically structured layout.
How might this ability arise in infant brains? Drawing on research in neuro-
science on visual development, natural selection may have favored the evolution
of processes, within the subcortical or older cortical regions found in diverse an-
imals, that generate activity that propagates to the plastic neocortical regions to
which they are connected. This activity could prepare the neocortex for a world
of objects, places, and numerical magnitudes, just as activity in the retinal gan-
glion cells or the superior colliculus prepares the cortex for the optic flow that
accompanies and guides their movements (chapter 1).
This hypothesis draws inspiration from research that relates patterns of spon-
taneous activity in the hippocampus to acts of navigation. When animals who
are learning to navigate through novel environments sleep, rest, or pause during
their travels, rapid sequences of neural activity simulate not only paths within
the environment that the animals have taken but also paths that were blocked
and therefore never traveled. This hippocampal activity occurs in human adults
as well, both in spatial and nonspatial tasks, and fosters subsequent performance
of the tasks whose actions it simulates. Processes of mental simulation may sup-
port learning in diverse domains. In baby rats, these rapid sequences of activity
in hippocampal neurons emerge a few days after eye opening, independently of
navigation experience, even before they explore their first novel environment
( chapter 3). These findings hint at how core knowledge might arise in infant
brains. Before infant animals begin to navigate through novel territory, they may
dream of such travels, generating activity that propagates through the neocortex
and prepares them for their first journeys.
It is possible that fetal dreaming helps to shape the highly plastic neocortex of
human infants, preparing newborn brains to learn from core knowledge. To date,
no evidence supports this possibility, but experiments on infants, using fNIRS,
lend it some plausibility. Lauren Emberson, John Richards, and Richard Aslin
(2015) imaged activity in the visual and auditory cortex of full-term 6-month-
old infants, and they found that their sensory processing benefited from a useful
top-down effect: When a sound signaled the imminent arrival of a visual display,
196 What Babies Know
the infants anticipated the display’s arrival, and their visual cortex responded on
trials when it was unexpectedly absent. In contrast, prematurely born infants,
tested at the same maturational age of 6 months, did not show the cortical re-
sponse to the absence of the expected visual display (Emberson et al., 2017).
Further studies have localized the deficit to descending signals from frontal
cortex, because the frontal cortex of the premature infants was responsive to the
unexpected trials, but the visual cortex to which it projects was not (Jaffe-Dax
et al., 2019).
The studies do not reveal why these signals are compromised by prema-
turity, but Emberson and her colleagues suggest that the premature infants’
experiences outside the womb, during what would otherwise be the last tri-
mester of pregnancy, could be the source of the problem (Emberson et al., 2017).
These experiences may interfere with the endogenous activity that would oth-
erwise propagate from frontal regions downward to the occipital regions that
prepare to receive expected sensory signals. Might prenatal endogenous activity
also propagate downward from frontal cortex to the cortical regions that prepare
fetal brains for the tasks of representing objects, places, and number? If so, then
studies of the emergence of core knowledge may reveal important lessons both
for basic science and for hospital practices in neonatal intensive care.
My next questions point in a different direction: Why is core knowledge so lim-
ited? For example, why do infants represent objects, but not nonsolid substances,
as persisting over occlusion? Nonsolid substances also persist, occupy space, and
move continuously, and some of them, like milk, are critical for an infant’s survival.
Further, why do toddlers navigate by the distances and directions of the walls of a
room but not by wall lengths and heights or by room sizes, shapes, and corners?
Shouldn’t cognitive evolution have endowed infants with mechanisms to encode
those other features as well? Still further, why are human infants endowed with
abilities to represent approximate numerical magnitudes but not exact numbers?
As Gallistel (1990) has argued, the natural number system is exceedingly simple—
if navigating animals can excel at path integration, why don’t they count? Above
all, why don’t children and other animals combine concepts from different core
knowledge systems to generate infinite families of new concepts? Simple recursive
rules, applied to the concepts of core knowledge, would give children an infinitely
rich language of thought. Indeed, some philosophers propose that humans and an-
imals are endowed with such a language (Fodor, 1975). The evidence from research
on infant humans and animals suggests, however, that infants’ knowledge is highly
limited. If evolution can produce creatures that fly and walk as well as swim, why
didn’t it endow newborn minds with more concepts ?
Historically, thinkers on both sides of the nativist-empiricist controversy have
assumed that the more one knows innately, the less one needs to learn. Recent
research in computational cognitive science suggests, however, that the re-
verse is true: A creature who possessed a rich array of innate concepts would
Core Knowledge 197
face a massive learning challenge if it lived, as all animals do, in an uncertain
and changeable environment. For such a creature, possession of the infinitely
many concepts that are expressible in an innate language of thought would be a
curse: the curse of a compositional mind.
For example, suppose that infants were endowed with all the concepts captured
by Euclidean geometry and, as toddlers, used these concepts to create a compre-
hensive geometric map of all the detectable features of the layouts through which
they move. Now imagine such a toddler in a bedroom that is replete with objects.
Like the great green room in the children’s book Goodnight Moon, by Margaret
Wise Brown, let us suppose that it has pictures on the walls, a big window, an
easy chair, a dollhouse, kittens, a mouse, and so forth. Before jumping into bed,
let us suppose that the toddler tucks her slippers under the night table. By which
relations in her comprehensive cognitive map should she look for her slippers in
the morning? By their distance and direction from the leftmost corner of the pic-
ture of the cow? By the center of the moon outside the window? By the shape of
the triangle formed by the toe of the left slipper, the dollhouse chimney, and the
mouse’s tail? By the path leading to the slippers from the knob she turned to enter
the room? Some of these properties will be reasonable guides in the very short
term, but some, like the mouse and the moon, will not, and none will be reliable
in the long term, because all depend on the locations of moveable objects. Only
through extensive experiences in diverse environments would the toddler learn
which of these properties to rely on.
Real children do not face this problem. Because core knowledge of places
captures only the distances and directions of the borders of the surface on which
they move, they will be neither overwhelmed nor misled by the changeable
positions of objects as they record where things are. Their abstract but limited
systems of core knowledge spare them the task of sifting through a vast array of
candidate landmarks when they look for an object. As a toddler moves to the bed
to remove her slippers, her place system automatically tracks her position on the
ground surface and its borders, and nothing more.
The curse of compositionality arises in every domain in which infants or an-
imals are born with core knowledge and face the task of learning about the dis-
tinctive properties of their local environment. Suppose, with Fodor (1975), that
animals and human infants were endowed with an innate, productively combina-
torial language of thought that is at least as rich as any human language. Suppose,
further, that this language takes as input all the representations from core know-
ledge, and combines those representations productively to generate an infinite
body of concepts. For example, it might generate the innate concept doorknob by
combining core representations of particular objects, places, forms (chapter 6),
and actions (chapter 7).2
2 Pace Fodor et al. (1980), who argued that lexical concepts cannot be decomposed into parts.
198 What Babies Know
In How Children Learn, I will propose that children learn this concept through
just this sort of combination, but here I am supposing that the concept is innate,
along with every other concept that is generated from core knowledge by the
combinatorial rules of the language of thought. What will infants and animals
do with this immense array of innate concepts, from doorknobs to tesseracts?
How will they know when to call on one of these concepts and when to call on
another? Each concept cannot be associated with a fixed set of conditions for its
application, because the world changes: Crossbows play a different role today
(in museums and movies) than in the Middle Ages. A capacity for generating a
prodigious stock of innate concepts would need to be accompanied by an equally
prodigious capacity for learning and access to a lot of data to learn from.
In summary, I suggest that the properties in table 5.1 go together, even though
experiments, to date, do not fully show this. Any ancient, abstract conceptual
system that has some of these properties is likely to have all of them. If that’s true,
then the core object and number systems indeed will prove, with further testing,
to be innate in humans; to be shared by a wide array of animals, giving them deep
evolutionary roots in the history of life on earth; and to function, in part, by gen-
erating mental simulations of events that fall within their domains.
Beyond the three systems discussed in the last chapters, what other systems
have the interconnected properties listed in table 5.1? Perceptual systems have
some but not all of these properties. They are ancient and encapsulated, but they
serve to recover, from information on our 2D retinas and tactile receptors and
our 1D cochleas, information about the detectable surfaces that surround us,
not the entities that those surfaces belong to. In contrast, the core object, place,
and number systems begin where perceptual systems end. They begin with 3D
objects, navigable layouts, and sets or sequences with approximate cardinal
values, and they bring us understanding of how objects interact, how places are
arranged and can be reached, and how sets of objects and events compare or
change in number as they merge or divide. Moreover, perceptual systems re-
cover information about the here and now, whereas the three core systems have
a broader reach. They allow us track objects that are hidden, to orient ourselves
with respect to places beyond those we can see, and to imagine sequences of
events and arrays of objects that we’ve never encountered.
Belief systems and theories also have some but not all of the properties in table
5.1. Beliefs vary across human development and human cultures, whereas the
object, place and form systems are universal and unchanging. Beliefs are ac-
quired through experience: Adults know far more than infants do, but our core
representations of objects and places may be no richer than those of infants
(though we likely use them with greater efficiency and acuity). Beliefs usually
are conscious and communicable: We express them to ourselves and others,
whereas the core object, place, and number systems are more apt to guide our
Core Knowledge 199
tacit assumptions. Finally, as Quine (1960) argued, beliefs are malleable and
form a seamless web: When we alter one belief, that alteration typically will
have impacts on other beliefs. Core knowledge systems, in contrast, are encap-
sulated: Their operation is unaffected by our current thinking. The core object,
place, and number systems combine some of the properties of perceptual sys-
tems and belief systems. Their inputs are the representations of immediately ac-
cessible surfaces that our perceptual systems deliver, and their outputs give rise
to the concepts and beliefs that populate our thoughts. These systems occupy a
middle ground between perception and thought.
In the next three chapters, I ask whether there are more cognitive systems in
this middle ground, with the properties listed in table 5.1. Research suggests that
infants gain knowledge rapidly and extensively in three domains I have not yet
considered. First, today’s infants learn about the forms and functions of artifact
objects—that cars, trucks, and bikes have wheels and can be driven from place to
place; that sippy cups and bottles have characteristic shapes and deliver milk and
other drinks—as well as the forms and functions of natural objects like rocks,
fruits, and trees. Second, infants learn about the actions and intentions of people
and animals: that dogs run to catch frisbees; that people pick up perceptually ac-
cessible things in order to act on them. Third, infants learn about the individual
members of their social world: who engages with whom and how people commu-
nicate by their expressions of emotion, their speech, and their gestures. Research
in developmental cognitive science provides a wealth of information about what
human infants know, and what young children learn, in these domains. Indeed,
considerably more research in developmental psychology has been devoted to
these domains than to the domains discussed in the previous three chapters.
Nevertheless, research on infants’ knowledge of object forms and functions, of
the actions, perceptions, and intentions of people and animals, and of the social
relations and engagements of people with one another, has generated no deep
understanding of the origins and nature of human knowledge in these domains.
On the contrary, these fields are full of controversies and open questions. Do
core representations of object shapes have an invariant geometric structure, or
do toddlers and young children learn to capture object structures and functions
as they manipulate, categorize, and learn names for things (e.g., Smith, 2009)?
Do infants appreciate that agents’ actions depend on their beliefs about the world
and not directly on the state of the world itself, or does this understanding de-
velop only later in childhood (e.g., Wellman, 2014)? Did humans evolve innate,
species-unique predispositions to cooperate and share experiences (Tomasello,
2009) and engage in moral evaluation (Hamlin et al., 2007), or do these unique
achievements depend on constructed concepts (e.g., Barragan & Dweck, 2014),
built on innate talents in the social domain that are as ancient and limited as
our innate talents for representing objects, places, and numbers (Spelke, 2016)?
200 What Babies Know
Research has not answered these questions decisively, I believe, because object
forms and functions, human and animal actions, and social engagements and
relationships are far more complex than bodies, places, and numbers.
Accordingly, the rest of this book will proceed as follows. I will review the lit-
erature on human infants’ representation of the forms and functions of objects
( chapter 6), interpretation of the actions of people and other agents in accord
with their intentions, perceptions, and values (chapter 7), and understanding
and evaluation of people and other social beings who share their experiences in
states of social engagement (chapter 8). In each case, I ask whether one or more
core cognitive systems with the properties in table 5.1 might be present and func-
tional in early infancy, guiding infants’ learning in these domains. This exercise
leads me to posit three more systems of core knowledge.
In chapter 9, I turn to a different, uniquely human capacity that emerges in
infancy: our talent for language. I review research on the first steps of infants’
learning of their native language over the course of the first year, and consider
how infants’ language learning may both build on and complement core know-
ledge. Then, in chapter 10, I introduce two new systems of knowledge that
emerge, I believe, at the end of the first year: a system for representing people’s
actions as both social and causal, and a system for representing people’s mental
states as both phenomenal experiences and intentional relations to objects and
events. I ask whether and how infants might harness their core knowledge sys-
tems, together with their growing knowledge of language, to construct these new,
highly flexible, and uniquely human systems of concepts. Has human evolution
given infants, alone among the animals, a way to build on the two blessings of ab-
straction, while reversing the curse of a compositional mind?
